REVIEW
published: 23 November 2021
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2021.754755

A History of the Tuna-Dolphin
Problem: Successes, Failures, and
Lessons Learned
Lisa T. Ballance 1* , Tim Gerrodette 2† , Cleridy E. Lennert-Cody 3 , Robert L. Pitman 1 and
Dale Squires 4
1
Marine Mammal Institute, Oregon State University, Newport, OR, United States, 2 Southwest Fisheries Science Center,
NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, CA, United States, 3 Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, La Jolla, CA, United States,
4
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States

Edited by:
Ellen Hines,
San Francisco State University,
United States
Reviewed by:
Louisa Shobhini Ponnampalam,
MareCet Research Organization,
Malaysia
Andrew Read,
Duke University, United States
*Correspondence:
Lisa T. Ballance
Lisa.Ballance@oregonstate.edu
† Retired

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Marine Conservation
and Sustainability,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Marine Science
Received: 06 August 2021
Accepted: 25 October 2021
Published: 23 November 2021
Citation:
Ballance LT, Gerrodette T,
Lennert-Cody CE, Pitman RL and
Squires D (2021) A History of the
Tuna-Dolphin Problem: Successes,
Failures, and Lessons Learned.
Front. Mar. Sci. 8:754755.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2021.754755

Multispecies aggregations of tuna, dolphins, and seabirds are prevalent and
conspicuous in the vast waters of the eastern tropical Pacific and form the basis of
a commercial fishery for yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares) through setting on schools
of dolphins, which is among the largest tuna fisheries in the world. Incidental dolphin
mortality associated with the development and early years of the fishery was high;
by 1993 it was estimated that eastern spinner dolphins (Stenella longirostris orientalis)
had been reduced to 44% and northeastern offshore spotted dolphins (S. attenuata
attenuata) to 19% of pre-fishery levels. Efforts to reduce this mortality began at the
inception of the fishery and comprised a diverse array of approaches: modifications to
fishing methods and fishing gear (backdown, Medina panel, high-intensity floodlights,
swimmers to disentangle and release dolphins); U.S. legislation (through the U.S.
Marine Mammal Protection Act, MMPA, and subsequent amendments); international
agreements (including the International Dolphin Conservation Program that established
dolphin mortality limits, and the legally binding multilateral Agreement on the
International Dolphin Conservation Program); and economic incentives [notably through
establishment of the U.S. dolphin-safe label and positive certification by the Marine
Stewardship Council (MSC)]. Together, these bycatch mitigation efforts have been
remarkably successful; dolphin mortality due to entanglement as recorded by fisheries
observers (hereafter, entanglement mortality) has been reduced by > 99%. Despite this,
the degree to which dolphin populations have recovered remains unclear. Multiple lines
of evidence indicate that individual dolphins experience multiple sets in their lifetimes
and although causality has not been established, research suggests that chase and
encirclement might have impacts on dolphins in addition to entanglement mortality.
These impacts potentially include increased fetal and/or calf mortality, separation of
nursing females and their calves, decreased fecundity, increased predation, disruption
of mating and other social systems, and ecological disruption. The strong management
emphasis on monitoring entanglement mortality, and the infrastructure necessary to

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

1

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

support this monitoring (in particular, 100% observer coverage on large purse-seiners)
require funding to the extent that other activities, particularly continued surveys to
monitor stock status and clarify the potential influence of other effects of the fishery
on dolphin populations, are currently inadequately funded.
Keywords: dolphin bycatch, tuna purse-seine fishery, dolphin safe, eastern tropical Pacific (ETP), spotted dolphin,
spinner dolphin, yellowfin tuna

INTRODUCTION

often accompanied by multispecies flocks of seabirds (dominated
by Procellariidae, Sulidae, and Laridae). The tuna, dolphins, and
most of the seabird species are found throughout the tropics
and although they associate to a certain degree in other tropical
oceans of the world, the prevalence of this assemblage is a
conspicuous feature and a hallmark of the ETP. There, habitat
of tuna is compressed to the warm and shallow waters of
the surface mixed layer by an extensive and hypoxic oxygenminimum zone, and the association potentially decreases the
risk of predation for dolphins and/or tuna (Scott et al., 2012).
Seabirds benefit from increased feeding success because dolphins
and tuna chase prey to the surface (Au and Pitman, 1986;
Ballance et al., 1997).

It has been over 60 years since the commercial fishing industry
first began to catch tuna in association with dolphins in a
vast and remote eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. The incidental
mortality of dolphins in this fishery formed the basis for what
became known as “the tuna-dolphin problem.” Efforts to lower
dolphin mortality provide one of the most successful examples
to date of interdisciplinary approaches to bycatch mitigation
and include modifications to fishing methods and gear, changes
in national legislations and international agreements, and the
generalized adoption of eco-labeling and marine stewardship
certification schemes. Economics, politics, law, policy, and ethics,
with regard to the conservation and use of marine resources and
the protection of marine mammals, have been deeply intertwined
throughout, and this debate has had important echoes in the
public opinion and in the media. Underlying the ways to address
this issue in its entirety has been science, at the forefront of
developing field and analytical methods to collect data to inform
bycatch mitigation actions.
The story is long, complex, and multifaceted. The account
below is presented in terms of types of bycatch mitigation efforts
rather than a chronology of events. These events played out so
that they often influenced one another in both constructive and
counter-productive ways. For clarity, we provide a chronology
in Table 1. In the context of bycatch mitigation, the story is
mostly of success; since inception of this fishery, associated
dolphin mortality has been reduced by more than 99%. And
the story is ongoing, and the fishery continues to operate.
However, there has been no mechanism in place to monitor
the status of the associated dolphin populations for well over a
decade, and so the conservation status of affected dolphin stocks
remains uncertain.

Development of the Tuna Purse-Seine
Fishery and Resulting Dolphin Bycatch
These multispecies aggregations can be large (tons of yellowfin
tuna—the target species, and hundreds to thousands of
dolphins and seabirds), diverse (Au, 1991), and are highly
visible at the ocean surface. Because of this, it is possible
to visually locate large schools of tuna by searching for
seabird flocks that closely track the schools and/or dolphins
at the sea surface. Additionally, the association is strong—
tuna remain with the dolphins even when the latter leave a
feeding aggregation. The conspicuousness of this association,
the reliability and tenacity of the bond between the tuna
and dolphins, and the large body size of the tuna in these
aggregations (bringing a higher price than smaller tuna)
prompted the development of an efficient and lucrative purseseine fishery for yellowfin tuna that continues to this day,
accounting for about 61% of all purse-seine catch of yellowfin
tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean in 2018 (Perrin, 1968;
National Research Council, 1992; Inter-American Tropical
Tuna Commission [IATTC], 2019). (The remaining ∼39% are
captured in ways that do not involve setting on dolphins,
primarily by setting on tuna schools that are associated with
natural and human-made free-floating objects, and by setting
on tuna schools that are not associated with either floating
objects or dolphins).
Prior to the development of modern purse seines, tropical
tuna were caught one at a time, on hooks, using pole-and-line
methods (National Research Council, 1992). The development
of durable synthetic netting and a hydraulically driven powerblock to haul very large nets (1500–2000 m long and 120–
250 m deep) made it possible to deploy purse seines around
entire schools of tuna (Gosliner, 1999). In what are known
as “dolphin sets,” fishermen aboard purse-seine vessels locate
schools of tuna by searching for dolphins and seabird flocks. The

THE PROBLEM: DOLPHIN BYCATCH IN
THE EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC
YELLOWFIN TUNA PURSE-SEINE
FISHERY
The Tuna-Dolphin-Seabird Assemblage
In the waters of the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean (ETP),
here defined as extending from 25◦ N to 10◦ S latitude and the
western coasts of the Americas as far as 150◦ W longitude, largebodied yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares) associate with several
species of dolphins: pantropical spotted (Stenella attenuata),
spinner (S. longirostris) and, to a lesser extent, short-beaked
common (Delphinus delphis) dolphins. These assemblages are

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

2

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

TABLE 1 | (Continued)

TABLE 1 | Timeline of significant events associated with mitigation of dolphin
mortality in the yellowfin tuna purse-seine fishery of the eastern tropical Pacific.

1959

Backdown first practiced by U.S. Captain Anton Meizetich

1961

Annual dolphin mortality estimated to be 550,000

1971

U.S. tuna purse-seine captains Harold and Joseph Medina report
decrease in dolphin net entanglement and kill associated with use of
the Medina panel

1972

Passage of the U.S. MMPA, including requirement for dolphin mortality
levels to be reduced to “insignificant levels approaching zero”

1973

Medina panel used by 60–70% of the U.S. tuna purse-seine fleet

1975

95% of dolphins captured in dolphin sets estimated to be released
through backdown

1979

IATTC begins dolphin conservation program modeled on U.S. effort

1981

U.S. embargoes Mexican tuna;
MMPA amended to: (a) Reduce incidental mortality of marine mammals
to levels approaching zero, (b) conduct research on locating and
catching yellowfin tuna not associated with incidental take of dolphins

1984

U.S. proportion of total purse-seine fleet practicing dolphin sets drops
to 42% (from 75% in mid 1970s);
MMPA amended to: (a) prescribe dolphin mortality quotas for U.S.
fleet, (b) require comparability in dolphin mortality between U.S. and
foreign fleet, (c) direct research to assess dolphin abundance and
trends
Annual dolphin mortality estimated to be 133,000;
U.S. lifts 1981 embargo against Mexican tuna;
Use of high-intensity floodlights during dolphin sets made at night
becomes mandatory for the U.S. fleet

1986

1986–
1990

U.S. NOAA Fisheries conducts annual research vessel surveys to
estimate dolphin abundance and trends, clarify stock structure, and
characterize the ecosystem

1987

Undercover video footage from Panamanian yellowfin tuna purse-seine
vessel depicting dolphin kill airs on U.S. national television

1988

MMPA amended to: (a) prohibit sundown sets; (b) require 100%
observer coverage on U.S. vessels and comparable coverage for the
foreign fleet; (c) place restrictions on use of explosives to herd
dolphins; (d) establish vessel performance standards; (e) require
research to identify alternative methods of catching tuna; (f) establish
stock-specific dolphin mortality limits for foreign fleet and metrics for
comparability between foreign and U.S. vessels

1990

Three largest tuna canners in U.S. announce they will no longer
purchase tuna caught on dolphins;
MMPA amended through Dolphin Protection Consumer Information
Act thereby establishing the U.S. dolphin-safe label (defined as no sets
made on dolphins during the entire trip for which tuna were captured,
as verified by a certified observer)

1992

La Jolla Agreement reached thereby establishing the International
Dolphin Conservation Program

1993

Eastern spinner and northeastern offshore spotted dolphins declared
depleted under the MMPA

1995

U.S. fleet no longer setting on dolphins, thereby achieving zero dolphin
mortality;
Declaration of Panama established

1997

MMPA amended to establish International Dolphin Conservation
Program Act

1998–
2000

U.S. NOAA Fisheries conducts annual research vessel surveys to
estimate dolphin abundance and trends, clarify stock structure, and
characterize the ecosystem

1999

Agreement on the International Dolphin Conservation Program
established

2001

Voluntary “AIDCP dolphin-safe label” created by the Parties to the
Agreement on the International Dolphin Conservation Program for tuna
caught in the eastern Pacific Ocean

2002

U.S. government scientists submit final report to Congress pertaining
to research on “whether the intentional deployment on or encirclement
of dolphins with purse seine nets is having a significant adverse impact
on any depleted dolphin stock in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean”;

U.S. Secretary of Commerce makes “final finding” that the “intentional
deployment on or encirclement of dolphins with purse seine nets is not
having a significant adverse effect on any depleted dolphin stock in the
Eastern Tropical Pacific ocean”;
U.S. dolphin-safe definition changed to include tuna caught with
dolphins if no dolphins were killed or seriously injured during those sets
U.S. District Court issues hold on the 2002 change in definition of
dolphin safe;
U.S. NOAA Fisheries conducts research vessel surveys to estimate
dolphin abundance and trends, clarify stock structure, and characterize
the ecosystem

2004

U.S. District Court requires that the U.S. label definition remain
unchanged from initial 1990 definition

2006

U.S. NOAA Fisheries conducts research vessel surveys to estimate
dolphin abundance and trends, clarify stock structure, and characterize
the ecosystem

2008

Mexico files formal complaint with World Trade Organization against
U.S. claiming that the dolphin-safe label creates unfair trade
discrimination

2017

Pacific Alliance for Sustainable Tuna (PAST) earns Marine Stewardship
Council certification for tuna caught by setting on dolphins in the
eastern tropical Pacific

2018

World Trade Organization Appeals Judges find the U.S. dolphin-safe
label to be in compliance with international trade regulations

2019

Net canopies and collapses decrease from 22 and 29% of dolphin sets,
respectively, in 1986–1.1% for both;
Trial dolphin abundance survey conducted, funded by the government
of Mexico and PAST

See main text for references. IATTC, Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission;
MMPA, U.S. Marine Mammal Protection Act; NOAA, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration.

search methods have evolved over time, from search primarily
conducted with high-powered binoculars to search conducted
primarily with radar and helicopters (Lennert-Cody et al.,
2016). The helicopter is also used to confirm the presence and
abundance of tuna once a sighting of birds and/or dolphins
has been made. Speedboats are then used to chase the dolphins
toward the purse-seine vessel, corral them into the net, and
prevent their escape as the net is set around them. Once
encircled, the bottom of the net is pursed capturing both the
dolphins and the tuna that remain with them during the chase
(Figure 1)1 .
Bycatch is often assumed to be or explicitly defined as
incidental (as opposed to deliberate) capture, and in this context,
it could be argued that dolphins should not be considered
bycatch in this fishery because they are intentionally captured.
However, because the dolphins are not the ultimate target
species and because they are released or discarded after capture
(see below), in the context of this fishery they are globally
recognized as bycatch. Explicitly, it is dolphin mortality and
serious injury associated with capture that is the problem
(although other potential effects of bycatch on dolphins have
been hypothesized, see below). For this reason, we refer to
dolphin bycatch mortality or dolphin mortality as the problem
that mitigation efforts have been focused on solving. Here,
we follow the explicit definition of bycatch as mortality or
serious injury (of dolphins) that are captured and discarded
(Hall, 1996).
1

(Continued)

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

2003

3

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IB96vsn6XPY

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

Achieving the goal of releasing dolphins alive and retaining
tuna in dolphin sets has been challenging because the body size
of the two species is so similar. The number of dolphins killed
through time has varied dramatically (Figure 2). Mortality in
the earliest years of the fishery (1960s and 1970s) is not known
with precision but without a doubt was very high (hundreds of
thousands killed per year; Lo and Smith, 1971) with an estimated
peak of 550,000 in 1961 (Smith, 1983). By the late 1970s, due
to changes in purse-seine gear, fishing practices, and statutory
regulations, mortality dropped significantly, and by 1980 had
declined to about 20,000 dolphins per year. For a variety of
reasons (see below), mortality increased in the late 1980s and then

dropped again; since 2000 mortality has remained low (on the
order of a thousand dolphins per year; Inter-American Tropical
Tuna Commission [IATTC], 2015, 2019).

The Impact of Bycatch Mortality on
Dolphin Populations
When the practice of setting on dolphins began, the taxonomy
of open-ocean dolphins was poorly known; indeed, the first
scientific reports of dolphin mortality came from Bill Perrin, a
graduate student who was collecting specimens for a taxonomic
study (Perrin, 1968). Beginning in the 1970s, observers were
placed on U.S. purse-seine vessels to record dolphin mortality
and collect tissue and bone samples. These data made it clear
that the dolphins killed in association with this fishery were
predominantly pantropical species, that spotted and spinner
dolphins were the species most heavily impacted, and that
some populations within each of these two species were
morphologically distinct from those elsewhere. Scientists now
recognize three stocks (management units recognized by the
MMPA) that have been of major focus. Two are named
subspecies: Coastal spotted dolphin (S. attenuata graffmani)
and eastern spinner dolphin (S. longirostris orientalis), and the
third, the northeastern offshore spotted dolphin, is a distinct
population within the offshore spotted dolphin subspecies
(S. attenuata attenuata). The degree of differentiation in
distributions, morphology, and genetics between these and other
stocks within these two species varies (Leslie et al., 2019, and
references therein).
Scientists also know a fair bit about abundance of these
dolphin stocks and trends in abundance through time, although
estimating these metrics in the vast region that is the ETP is a
formidable task and significant knowledge gaps and uncertainty
remain. Prior to the start of the tuna purse-seine fishery and
through the period of highest mortality in the 1960s, there
were no estimates of dolphin abundance. During the 1970s,
U.S. government scientists pioneered methods of ship-based
line-transect surveys using 25X binoculars to estimate dolphin
abundance. Although by the late 1970s it was clear that dolphin
mortality was large relative to estimated population sizes, it
was not until 1993 that sufficient data had been collected, and
analytical methods developed, to estimate that eastern spinner
dolphins had been reduced to 44% and northeastern offshore
spotted dolphins to 19% of pre-fishery levels (Wade, 1993a,b,
respectively). Both stocks were subsequently declared “depleted”
under the MMPA (with depletion defined as stock abundance
below 60% of carrying capacity).
By the mid-1990s dolphin mortality had declined to levels
so low, relative to abundance, that recovery of depleted dolphin
stocks was anticipated. However, surveys carried out in 1998–
2000 indicated no recovery at the expected rate of 4% (Gerrodette
and Forcada, 2005); recovery rates below this would have been
difficult to detect given the statistical power of the survey.
Modeling found equal support for hypotheses which attributed
the lack of recovery to the fishery or to changes in the ecosystem
(Wade et al., 2007). The intensity of fishing—it is estimated that
every single dolphin of the two primary targeted species was

FIGURE 1 | Aerial photograph of a purse-seine set on a school of tuna and
dolphins. The purse-seine vessel is deploying the net in a large circle around
the entire school while a skiff holds the end of the net in place. In this
photograph the net is not yet closed; four speedboats are driving in tight
circles near the opening to prevent the dolphins (and tuna) from escaping.
Source: Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission.

FIGURE 2 | Estimated number of dolphins killed annually in the eastern
tropical Pacific tuna purse-seine fishery, total for all dolphins and separately for
the stocks of the two dolphin species with the highest number killed (Wade
et al., 2007; Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC], 2020). The
inset graph has an expanded vertical scale to show details from 2000 to
2019; notice the change of scale on the Y -axis.

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

4

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

chased and encircled multiple times every year—meant that even
a small effect of this activity on dolphin survival or reproduction
would be enough to plausibly explain the lack of recovery (Reilly
et al., 2005, see below).
Additional surveys conducted in 2003 and 2006 produced
higher estimates of eastern spinner and northeastern offshore
spotted dolphins, indicating that a recovery might be starting,
although the substantial uncertainty surrounding the estimates
of abundance meant that the 95% confidence interval on
growth rate still included 0 (Gerrodette et al., 2008). Putting
the bycatch mortality and abundance estimates together in
a population model indicated that the two main affected
stocks were indeed increasing (Inter-American Tropical Tuna
Commission [IATTC], 2009). There have been no new dolphin
abundance estimates since 2006, but reported dolphin mortality
has remained low, < 0.1% of population size for each stock.

mortality relative to dolphin population sizes), the time required
to extract dolphins from the nets was an immediate problem for
fishers. Even as the fleet was still converting vessels from poleand-line methods to dolphin sets using purse seines, the industry
began working to reduce dolphin entanglement in purse-seine
nets, thereby decreasing mortality associated with these sets.
Subsequent to passage of the MMPA in 1972, U.S. government
scientists were also directed to contribute to mitigation of dolphin
mortality (see below).

Backdown
“Backdown” refers to a method developed by fishers to release
dolphins from the pursed net. It involves running a vessel in
reverse after the seine has been pursed and approximately twothirds of the net brought on board the vessel. This pulls the net
into a long and narrow channel with captured dolphins tending
to congregate at the far end, at or near the ocean surface. As the
vessel continues to move in reverse, the corkline at the far end
is pulled underwater, spilling the dolphins out, over the top of
the net (Figure 3). The tuna tend to remain below the dolphins
in a deeper part of the net. This method is believed to have first
been applied in the context of dolphin sets in 1959 by the captain
of a vessel based in San Diego, California, U.S. Subsequent to
further development in 1961, the use of backdown spread rapidly
through the San Diego-based fleet, which was conducting the
majority of dolphin sets at that time (Barham et al., 1977).
Dolphins that do not escape on their own, are hand-hauled over

BYCATCH MITIGATION THROUGH
MODIFICATIONS IN FISHING METHODS
AND FISHING GEAR
Dolphin mortality was immediately recognized as a problem by
the yellowfin tuna purse-seine fishing industry (see below). While
concern regarding the impact of this mortality in the context
of conservation would not come to light for another decade
(simply because so little was known about the magnitude of

FIGURE 3 | Backdown procedure in progress. As the tuna vessel moves backward to the right in this schematic, the net is drawn into a long channel. The corkline
at the far end (left) is pulled under water 1–3 m, and the dolphins (referred to as “porpoise” in this figure, and in the early years of the fishery) escape. The Medina
panel (labeled “medina strip” in this figure) and Apron are panels of netting with smaller mesh size to prevent dolphins from becoming entangled as they escape.
Source: Leeper, 1976.

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

5

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

following the Medina Panel model, skill and judgment of
the captain and crew, operational characteristics of the purseseine vessel and skiff, potential fouling of the mesh with
planktonic invertebrates, and wind and sea conditions (Perrin,
1969). Likely related to these factors, most dolphin mortality
tended to occur during a small number of sets, often when
tonnage of tuna or number of dolphins were particularly high
(Barham et al., 1977).
One factor directly correlated with dolphin mortality was
time of day (Coan et al., 1992). Most dolphin sets were
made during daylight (90% in a sample of 20,722 dolphin sets
during 1979–1988; Coan et al., 1992) because some daylight
is generally required to conduct search. The relatively small
proportion of dolphin sets made during the night accounted
for a disproportionate number of dolphin deaths and a higher
mortality rate (e.g., 10% of 20,722 sets during 1979–1988
accounted for 30% of the dolphin mortality; Coan et al.,
1992). This is because restricted visibility at night impairs the
ability to control the purse-seine net during backdown. In
the early 1980s, the tuna industry began to experiment with
the use of high-intensity floodlights to illuminate dolphins
in the nets at night, thereby facilitating net control. Dolphin
mortality from night sets that used other types of lights, or
no lights, was significantly higher than night sets using highintensity floodlights (Coan et al., 1992). Use of the latter became
mandatory for the U.S. tuna fleet in 1986, and subsequently, for
non-U.S. vessels when a “sundown set” prohibition came into
effect (see below). Fishers must now complete backdown no later
than 30 min after sunset.

the corkline by vessel crew who enter the water or work from a
raft inside the net (see below).
Gear workshops for vessel skippers, to share information and
refine backdown techniques, were held during the early 1970s
and facilitated even more widespread use of the method (see
below). By 1975, about 95% of dolphins captured in dolphin sets
were being released during backdown, with another 3% released
through other methods (Southwest Fisheries Center, 1975 as cited
in Gosliner, 1999). Backdown effectiveness and post-backdown
rescue were further improved through research conducted by
U.S. government scientists in collaboration with the industry
(Ralston, 1977 as cited in Gosliner, 1999).

The Medina Panel
The Medina panel was developed to reduce dolphin
entanglement in the mesh of the purse-seine. Generally,
dolphins avoid contact with the net, but when they do not,
their flippers, flukes, and rostra can become entangled, and
they drown. During “disaster sets,” whole schools of panicked
dolphins, including hundreds of individuals, have drowned.
This problem was recognized early by the U.S. tuna fleet and
following a 1970 meeting of fishing captains, Captain Harold
Medina placed a 720 ft wide by 33 ft deep panel in the backdown
area with 2-inch mesh netting (instead of the typical 4 1/4-inch
mesh; Barham et al., 1977; Figure 3). He and his cousin, Captain
Joseph Medina, Jr., who modified his vessel’s purse-seine net
similarly, reported a decrease in dolphin entanglement and
mortality during the 1971 fishing season. By the end of the
1972 season, what became known as the “Medina Panel” had
voluntarily been installed in 40–50% of U.S. tuna seiners, and
in 60–70% by 1973. Subsequent research by U.S. government
scientists further improved the effectiveness of the Medina
Panel through adjustments in mesh size and development of
the “porpoise apron,” a trapezoid-shaped panel of small-mesh
webbing immediately above the Medina Panel (Barham et al.,
1977; Coe et al., 1984; Gosliner, 1999; Figure 3).
Since at least the mid-1980s, the Inter-American Tropical
Tuna Commission (IATTC) has offered “net alignment”
inspections to fishing vessels of the international fleet (Bratten,
1983), which help fishing captains determine the best net
configuration to allow them to successfully implement backdown
(see below). These inspections, also referred to as “trial” sets,
typically involve 1 day at sea during which a staff member of
the IATTC onboard the vessel monitors the net position and
crew activities during a simulated set, including implementation
of the backdown procedure. The IATTC staff member enters
the water on a raft inside the net, once the net is pursed, and
provides suggestions to the captain regarding net alignment so
that the Medina Panel (also known as the “dolphin safety” panel)
is properly positioned at the end of the backdown channel.

Use of Swimmers and Divers to Release
Dolphins
Dolphins that do not escape from the net during backdown are
assisted over the corkline by vessel crew working from a raft
within the pursed net. Dolphins can also become entangled in
billows of netting (“net canopies”) or in areas where sides of
the net have come into contact (“net collapses”), contributing to
mortality (Lennert-Cody et al., 2004). Divers work from within
the net to release these entangled dolphins below the surface.
Educational seminars (see below) also provide fishing captains
with information on how to avoid net canopies and collapses
and have been highly effective. The occurrence of net canopies
and net collapses has decreased from 22 and 29% of dolphin sets,
respectively, in 1986 to 1.1% for both in 2019 (Inter-American
Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC], 2020).

Fisher Education on Bycatch Mitigation
Following on gear workshops conducted by U.S. scientists,
the IATTC has conducted informational seminars for fishing
captains since the early 1980s about a range of matters related
to setting on dolphin-associated tuna. The scope of the material
presented in these seminars initially focused on the use of
fishing gear to reduce dolphin mortality (Bratten, 1983) but
has expanded over time. With ratification of the Agreement
on the International Dolphin Conservation Program (AIDCP)
in, 1999 (see below), periodic attendance at these seminars

High-Intensity Floodlights
Although backdown and the Medina Panel greatly reduced
dolphin mortality, the absolute number of dolphins killed in
purse-seine sets remained high. The effectiveness of these fishing
methods and gear modifications depended on a variety of
factors including net buoyancy, vessel-specific gear modifications

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

6

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

moratorium on regulation. During this moratorium, the U.S.
tuna industry and U.S. government scientists were expected to
solve the mortality problem through development of improved
fishing methods. Scientific studies were initiated, observers
were placed on fishing boats, fishing gear was inspected, and
boat captains with high dolphin mortality rates were reviewed.
Nevertheless, mortality in dolphin sets continued to be high, and
this prompted a series of amendments to the MMPA beginning in
1981. These amendments reiterated the goal of reducing dolphin
mortality rates to levels approaching zero (although economic
and technological considerations were allowed5 ) and directed the
Secretary of Commerce to undertake or fund research focused
on locating and catching yellowfin tuna that did not involve the
incidental taking of dolphins [“Take” under the MMPA means “to
harass, hunt, capture, or kill, or attempt to harass, hunt, capture,
or kill any marine mammal” (16 U.S.C. 1362)].
The 1981 regulations were restrictive enough to contribute
to the decision of many U.S. vessels to register under flags of
other countries (thereby not subject to U.S. legislation) or to fish
for tuna in other geographic regions, using other methods. As
U.S. vessels left the fleet, vessels from other countries entered
so that the number of vessels using dolphin sets continued
to increase (Sakagawa, 1991; DeMaster et al., 1992; Gosliner,
1999). Concern that U.S. gains in lowering dolphin mortality
were being offset by increased mortality from non-U.S. vessels
prompted the U.S. Congress to enact additional amendments
to the MMPA in 1984. These: (1) designated quotas of dolphin
mortality for the U.S. tuna fleet that would carry forward in time
indefinitely; (2) required that dolphin mortality associated with
tuna imports would be comparable with the U.S. fleet and allowed
for embargoes on tuna imports that did not comply; and (3)
directed research to assess abundance and trends for the affected
dolphin populations as a means of revising dolphin mortality
quotas if necessary.
Following the 1984 amendments to the MMPA, a previous
embargo imposed on Mexican tuna imports was lifted in
1986. However, an increase in dolphin mortality in 1986 to
over 100,000 and other failures to lower dolphin mortality
prompted additional amendments to the MMPA in 1988.
These prohibited U.S. vessels from making “sundown sets,”
required 100% observer coverage on U.S. vessels (see below),
prohibited the use of explosives other than seal bombs to herd
dolphins, required research addressing the impact of seal bombs
on dolphins, established performance standards pertaining to
dolphin mortality rates for vessels and captains, and required
that research independent from U.S. government scientists be
undertaken to identify alternative methods of catching large
yellowfin tuna that did not involve incidental take of marine
mammals. The 1988 MMPA amendments also placed additional

became a requirement for fishing captains to be certified to
set on dolphins under this agreement2 . The purpose of the
seminars is to: (1) inform captains about gear requirements
(e.g., flood lights, a minimum of three speed boats with towing
bridles, and rafts, masks, and snorkels); (2) review factors that
contribute to dolphin mortality (e.g., setting in high currents,
the dolphin species involved3 , net canopies and collapses, and
major equipment malfunctions); (3) review guidelines on actions
captains can take to avoid high dolphin mortality; and, (4)
provide information on prohibited actions under the AIDCP4
(e.g., night sets, use of explosives which were historically used
to herd dolphins, and other actions leading to infractions against
captains and potential removal from the “qualified” list).

BYCATCH MITIGATION THROUGH U.S.
LEGISLATION AND INTERNATIONAL
AGREEMENTS
Three factors have had a major influence on how U.S. legislation,
other national legislations, and international agreements have
developed, how they have influenced one another, and how
effective they have been with respect to reducing dolphin
mortality. First, dolphin sets occur throughout an area that is
large and remote, including the Exclusive Economic Zones of ten
nations (Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua,
Costa Rica, Panama, Ecuador, Peru, and France) as well as the
high seas (Figure 4). The sheer size and remoteness of the
region, and the multinational nature of the fishery (see below),
complicate data collection, regulation, and enforcement. Second,
the market for tuna in the U.S. is large and lucrative, and access
to this market has been and, in some cases, continues to be a
strong draw for the sale of canned tuna products, including those
derived from dolphin sets. Third, although the method of setting
on tuna associated with dolphins was developed on U.S. vessels,
and most of the fleet practicing this method were U.S. vessels
in the 1960s and 1970s, very few U.S. vessels have fished this
way since the early 1990s, and the fleet using dolphin sets is
now comprised of vessels from 9 other nations. The result has
been a change in focus on mitigation of dolphin mortality to the
international arena.

U.S. Legislation
The magnitude of dolphin mortality in the ETP tuna purseseine fishery first came to widespread public attention in the
U.S. in the mid-1960s. The public outcry over the scale of
dolphin mortality was one of the factors that ultimately drove
the creation and passage of the MMPA in 1972. From its
inception, the MMPA included provisions for reducing dolphin
mortality to “insignificant levels approaching zero” after a 2-year

“. . .it shall be the immediate goal that the incidental kill or incidental serious
injury of marine mammals permitted in the course of commercial fishing
operations be reduced to insignificant levels approaching a zero mortality
and serious injury rate; provided that this goal shall be satisfied in the case
of the incidental taking of marine mammals in the course of purse seine
fishing for yellowfin tuna by a continuation of the application of the best
marine mammal safety techniques and equipment that are economically and
technologically practicable.” https://www.congress.gov/97/statute/STATUTE-95/
STATUTE-95-Pg979.pdf
5

2

https://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/AIDCP_Maintaining%
20qualified%20captain%20list.pdf
3
Eastern spinner and common dolphins have higher mortality rates than offshore
spotted dolphins (Lennert-Cody et al., 2004), related to behavior within the pursed
net (Pryor and Norris, 1978).
4
http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/AIDCP.pdf

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

7

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

FIGURE 4 | A wide-ranging fishery—distribution of purse-seine sets on dolphins during 2010 in the eastern tropical Pacific; a total of 11,645 sets are shown
(Source: Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC], 2015).

and coastal spotted dolphins, prohibited commercial handling
of tuna in the U.S. that had been caught on dolphins,
and authorized funds for research focused on dolphin-safe
methods of locating and catching large yellowfin tuna. More
amendments in 1997 established the International Dolphin
Conservation Program Act (IDCPA), the U.S. implementation
of the International Agreement on the International Dolphin
Conservation Program (see below), to which the U.S. is a
Party. Among other things, the IDCPA directed scientists of
the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) to conduct
research to determine “whether the intentional deployment on
or encirclement of dolphins with purse-seine nets is having a
significant adverse impact on any depleted dolphin stock in
the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean.” According to the statute,
the answer to this question would determine whether the
U.S. Department of Commerce would be allowed to change
the definition of “dolphin-safe tuna” under the MMPA to
match that definition adopted under the International Dolphin
Conservation Program (see below).

requirements on tuna imports by tightening the requirement
that dolphin mortality be comparable to that of the U.S. fleet,
establishing stock-specific mortality limits, restricting imports
from third-party countries, and directing that non-U.S. vessels
achieve observer coverage comparable to the U.S. fleet.
The requirement that tuna imports from non-U.S. vessels
be regulated the same as tuna caught on U.S. vessels
became the focus of much litigation. This was further
fueled by graphic and widespread dissemination of video
depicting dolphin kills in the fishery and subsequent voluntary
actions by U.S. tuna canners to buy only tuna caught using
methods other than setting on dolphins. The MMPA was
again amended in 1990 through the Dolphin Protection
Consumer Information Act (DPCIA) establishing the “dolphinsafe” label (see below). Amendments in 1992 established the
International Dolphin Conservation Act. This act provided
a mechanism for lifting tuna embargos by the U.S. against
other countries, revised dolphin mortality quotas for the U.S.
fleet, prohibited intentional sets on depleted eastern spinner

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

8

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

mortality would be verified by fisheries observers, which would
be placed on every boat over 363 metric tons (i.e., “large” purseseine vessels). Although it did not come to pass (see below), some
participating nations expected that in exchange for formalization
of these binding commitments that would be enshrined in the
AIDCP, the U.S. Congress would amend the MMPA to lift the
embargoes for tuna caught in compliance with the La Jolla
Agreement, allowing access to the U.S. market for all such tuna.
The expectation also included a change in the definition of
dolphin safe (see below) to include any tuna caught in the ETP
in a set in which no dolphins were observed to be killed.
In 1998, features of the La Jolla Agreement and the Declaration
of Panama were formally incorporated into a legally binding,
multilateral agreement establishing the Agreement on the
International Dolphin Conservation Program (AIDCP, Hedley,
2001). The AIDCP has three primary objectives: (1) progressively
reduce incidental dolphin mortalities in the tuna purse-seine
fishery in the Agreement Area to levels approaching zero,
through the setting of annual DMLs; (2) seek ecologically sound
means of capturing large yellowfin tuna not in association with
dolphins; and (3) ensure the long-term sustainability of the tuna
stocks in the Agreement Area, and other marine resources related
to this fishery, taking into consideration the interrelationship
among species in the ecosystem.

International Agreements
As the proportion of U.S. vessels setting on dolphins decreased,
and the proportion of non-U.S. vessels increased, concern and
focus on monitoring and reducing dolphin mortality became
international. The Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
(IATTC), an international commission responsible for the
conservation and management of tuna and other living marine
resources in the eastern Pacific Ocean6 , began a dolphin
conservation program in 1979, modeled on the U.S. effort. In
1992, in part due to the increasing focus on comparability
of dolphin mortality to the U.S. fleet under the MMPA and
the dolphin-safe label (see below), fishing countries setting on
dolphins agreed to increase observer coverage, institute skipper
review panels, and meet a schedule of decreasing dolphin
quotas on an individual boat basis. The agreement came to be
known as the La Jolla Agreement (Inter-American Tropical Tuna
Commission [IATTC], 1993), and it resulted in the establishment
of the International Dolphin Conservation Program. A key
feature was an allowable limit of dolphin mortality, known as
the Dolphin Mortality Limit (DML). Establishing this on a pervessel basis was a remarkable success. Once a vessel reached
its own DML it was required to cease dolphin sets, thereby
placing the fate of a vessel in the hands of the captain and
crew. Oversight of DMLs occurs through the IATTC. All vessels
requesting DMLs receive them; a vessel changing flags retains
its DML and its record of dolphin mortality during the year
to date, and the new flag state enforces the DML obligations;
DMLs are not transferable, rather DMLs from vessels renouncing
or forfeiting their assigned limits are redistributed among other
vessels although some ad hoc transfers among vessels are also
allowed (Allen et al., 2010).
The La Jolla Agreement also established an International
Review Panel (IRP; Bayliff, 2001), serving as an international
forum for reviewing compliance-related matters. In a pioneering
move to promote transparency, the IRP included not only
governmental representatives of the Parties to the Agreement but
also elected representatives of the industry and of environmental
non-governmental organizations. The IRP was tasked with the
review of cases for which the data collected by a fisheries observer
indicate apparent non-compliance by the vessel with the La Jolla
Agreement. For example, the IRP reviews cases of apparent use
of explosives during any phase of the dolphin set, as well as
the timing of the release of the net skiff relative to sundown
(possible night sets). Because the IATTC has no enforcement
power, disciplinary action associated with any case that is found
to be in non-compliance is the responsibility of the government
of the vessel’s flag state.
The La Jolla Agreement was followed by the Declaration of
Panama in 1995, signed by 12 nations, including the U.S. These
nations reaffirmed a commitment to reduce dolphin mortality to
levels approaching zero and declared their intention to formally
establish strict stock-specific DMLs on a per-vessel basis. Dolphin

BYCATCH MITIGATION THROUGH
ECONOMIC INCENTIVES:
ECO-LABELING AND MARINE
FISHERIES CERTIFICATION
The U.S. Dolphin-Safe Label
By the late 1980s, 40–50% of purse-seine trips by non-U.S.
vessels carried a fisheries observer. This allowed for statistically
reliable estimates of dolphin mortality associated with dolphin
sets (Joseph, 1994). The numbers provided by IATTC through the
latter part of the 1980s were high (Figure 2). Graphic depictions
of the nature of this mortality were made public when an activist,
working undercover aboard a Panamanian purse seiner in 1987,
took video footage that was aired on U.S. national television
(Brower, 1989). The 1988 amendments to the MMPA (requiring
that dolphin mortality associated with tuna imported from other
countries be comparable to the U.S. fleet) and ensuing litigation
based on claims of non-compliance provided additional incentive
for environmental groups to pursue a consumer boycott and
to push legislation requiring that tuna be labeled according
to the method in which it was caught. This perfect storm of
events was followed in April of 1990 by the three largest U.S.
tuna canners (Star-Kist, Chicken of the Sea, and Bumble Bee)
voluntarily declaring that they would no longer purchase tuna
captured in association with dolphins. Shortly thereafter (that
same year, 1990), the Dolphin Protection Consumer Information
Act (DPCIA) was passed with amendments of the MMPA. It
established what we refer to here as the U.S. “dolphin-safe”
label, mandating that no sets on dolphins were made during
the entire trip for which tuna were captured, as verified by a

6

The IATTC, one of five regional tuna fisheries management organizations in the
world, is responsible for the conservation and management of tuna and other
marine resources in the eastern Pacific Ocean, from the coast of the Americas to
150◦ W, between 50◦ S–50◦ N. http://www.iattc.org/.

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

9

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

(2) available data were insufficient to clearly resolve the matter of
whether or not there had been substantial ecosystem changes in
the ETP that would inhibit or enhance these populations’ ability
to recover; and (3) the fishery may have effects on dolphins at the
population level in addition to the reported mortality (see below).
On 31 December 2002, the U.S. Secretary of Commerce
made a “final finding” that the “intentional deployment on or
encirclement of dolphins with purse-seine nets is not having a
significant adverse effect on any depleted dolphin stock in the
Eastern Tropical Pacific Ocean.” With this, the definition of
dolphin safe changed to include tuna caught with dolphins if
no dolphins were killed or seriously injured during those sets.
The decision was immediately (that same day) challenged by a
group of non-governmental organizations that included Earth
Island Institute, the Humane Society of the U.S., and the Oceanic
Society, and, in April of 2003, the U.S. District Court issued
a hold on the change in definition of dolphin safe. Following
another year of litigation, the court ordered that no further
proceedings on the matter would be allowed due to repeated
failures by the Secretary to heed Congress’ intent and instructions
from previous courts and required that the U.S. label definition
remain unchanged (U.S. District Court for the Northern District
of California, 2004).
Even prior to these developments, the U.S. dolphin-safe label
had already become the subject of tension and international
trade disputes that have now spanned three decades. In
accordance with the DPCIA and following the establishment
of the dolphin-safe label in 1990, the U.S. placed an embargo
on tuna from Mexico in February 1991, and subsequently
on eleven additional countries. Also in 1991, a three-person
dispute resolution panel agreed with Mexico that the U.S.
embargo violated the General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT), an international agreement that limits the use of
trade restrictions. Although this decision was never adopted
as a formal GATT ruling (Gosliner, 1999), it set the stage for
subsequent litigation.
This litigation played out in various hearings and proceedings
overseen by the World Trade Organization (WTO), a global
international organization dealing with the rules of trade between
nations. Various nations (through reserving third-party rights)
were involved; the formal complaint was brought to the WTO
by Mexico in 2008 with claims that the U.S. violated articles
of GATT by creating unfair trade discrimination with the
dolphin-safe label. The argument centered on the fact that
only tuna caught in the ETP was subject to criteria associated
with the dolphin-safe label and that tuna caught elsewhere
could use the label without following the strict requirements
imposed in the ETP. In this context, the WTO ruled against
the U.S. in 2012. Modifications to the labeling policy made

certified observer. Vessels considered too small to deploy nets
around dolphins (fish-carrying capacity ≤ 363 metric tons) were
exempted (Gosliner, 1999).
A number of dolphin-safe labels then developed in conformity
with the MMPA’s dolphin-safe labeling definition, and these
proved to be powerful marketing tools. Prominent on canned
tuna, the labels, combined with environmental organization
campaigns to pressure major U.S. retailors, effectively excluded
tuna caught on dolphins from an extremely large and lucrative
U.S. market. At that time (1990), only non-U.S. vessels were
setting on dolphins and the desire to re-enter this market formed
the basis for The La Jolla Agreement, The Declaration of Panama,
100% fisheries observer coverage on all large vessels7 , and the
establishment of vessel-specific DMLs. Following the Declaration
of Panama, the 1997 amendments to the MMPA included a
provision for a change in the definition of dolphin safe. But the
change was later conditioned by the U.S. Congress on research to
determine whether the chase and encirclement of dolphins was
having “a significant adverse impact” on dolphin populations.
The logic was that if the very act of chasing, encircling, and
releasing dolphins was having a negative effect on dolphin
populations, it would be misleading to label tuna caught by
such methods “dolphin safe.” From the perspective of other
signatories to the Panama Declaration, these conditions were
perceived as a retreat from the commitments made by the U.S.,
and there were concerns by some that if increased access to
the U.S. market was not realized, support for the international
agreement that had been negotiated might decline. Given that
the vast majority of the fishery was conducted by non-U.S.
vessels, the logical extension of these concerns was that failure
to change the U.S. label definition might have the ironic result
of undermining international efforts to conserve and recover
depleted dolphin stocks.
Nevertheless, under direction from the U.S. Congress,
research to address whether the chase and encirclement of
dolphins was having “a significant adverse impact” on dolphin
populations proceeded. This research included estimation of
dolphin abundance and trends through time, quantification of
ecosystem variability, and studies on potential non-lethal impacts
of the fishery on dolphins (Reilly et al., 2005). The research
program was developed with the IATTC and the U.S. Marine
Mammal Commission (an independent U.S. government agency
established through the MMPA and charged with furthering
the conservation of marine mammals and their environment).
The research methods, results, and conclusions went through
extensive peer review. The final research report was submitted
to the U.S. Congress in 2002 (Reilly et al., 2005) and concluded
that: (1) The two dolphin stocks declared depleted under the
MMPA were not recovering at a rate expected given their
levels of depletion and the recorded mortality from the fishery8 ;

for northeastern offshore spotted dolphins, and 448,608 (CV = 22.9%) for
eastern spinner dolphins. In a letter to the U.S. Secretary of Commerce,
https://iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/AIDCP_%20Report%20to%20the%
20US%20Secretary%20of%20Commerce.pdf the IATTC argued that given the
low observed mortality rates and dolphin population sizes in the hundreds of
thousands, that the slow recovery observed is what should be expected rather
than the higher rates expected by NMFS (INTER-American Tropical Tuna
Commission [IATTC], 2002; see also Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
[IATTC], 2015).

7

The 100% observer coverage is achieved through a combination of observers of
the IATTC and observers of national observer programs (Bayliff, 2001).
8
However, the NMFS surveys did show slow growth rates in the dolphin
populations, albeit statistically non-significant ones, with northeastern
offshore spotted and eastern spinner dolphins growing at rates of 1.7 and
1.4% per year, respectively (Reilly et al., 2005). The average of the abundance
estimates for the years 1998, 1999, and 2000 were 641,153 (CV1 = 16.9%)

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

10

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

Marine fisheries certifications are programs designed to increase
consumer awareness of environmental impacts and sustainability
of fisheries. These certifications range from regional to global in
scale and impact. Typically, they establish standards for impact
and/or sustainability, review fisheries, and provide fisheryspecific ratings through lists or ecolabels to better inform
consumers and concerned citizens. The number of marine
fisheries certification programs is growing as fishing industries,
environmental regulators, politicians, economists, biologists, and
consumers increasingly recognize the value of promoting the
sustainable use of living marine resources, and the influence that
these certification programs have on the public at large.

Among the best known of marine fisheries certification
programs is the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC). Established
in 1996, MSC is an international non-profit organization whose
stated mission is to use their ecolabel and fishery certification
program to reward sustainable fishing practices and influence
consumer choice when buying seafood, thereby transforming the
seafood market to a sustainable basis.
The MSC became a catalyst for another effort to obtain
broader market accessibility for tuna caught on dolphins in the
ETP when the Pacific Alliance for Sustainable Tuna (PAST)
earned MSC certification in 2017. PAST was formed in 2014
as an alliance of four companies representing over 90% of
the yellowfin and skipjack tuna industry in Mexico. These
companies use purse seines in the ETP to capture tuna by
setting on schools associated with dolphins, or on unassociated
schools (“free schools”). The sustainability assessment was carried
out by a third-party certification body and included extensive
review by scientists and stakeholder consultation, as is standard
practice by MSC. Certification was based on the fact that the
fishery adheres to the AIDCP rule that all vessels carry an
independent observer to ensure compliance, and that the goal
of each set on tuna associated with dolphins is to release all
captured dolphins alive. To facilitate the latter, and as already
required by the AIDCP, all vessels in the fleet use purse-seine
nets with Medina Panels, practice backdown, and carry gear
for swimmers should it be necessary to assist dolphins over the
corkline of the net.
A final condition of MSC certification for PAST was
that it formally commit to a sustainability action plan. This
plan consisted of five components (Figure 5) and included
a commitment to provide significant financial investment in
an international research program to conduct a fisheriesindependent survey to assess the status of dolphin populations
in the ETP. This latter condition was associated with public
concern regarding the status of dolphin populations impacted
by dolphin sets.
Although some steps have been made toward development of
a plan to update assessments of the status of dolphin populations
(the previous assessment having been conducted in 2006),
adoption of a survey plan by the AIDCP has yet to occur and
funding sources for such a plan are yet to be identified. Progress
toward assessing stock status includes: a review of available
methodology for estimating dolphin abundance, including but
not limited to ship-based surveys (Johnson et al., 2018); and
development of ship-based survey design options (Oedekoven
et al., 2018), which include new methodology to explore
the possibility of negative bias in the abundance estimates
(Barlow, 2015)11 . In addition, a trial dolphin survey, funded
by the government of Mexico and PAST, was conducted in
November 2019 with the goal of testing a survey vessel provided
by the government of Mexico and new drone-based survey
methodology. The results of this trial survey indicate that the

9

11

in 2013 strengthened the criteria used to ensure that tuna
caught in other regions and sold under the dolphin-safe label
was caught without injuring or killing dolphins, but a 2015
ruling by a WTO compliance panel found these changes to
be unacceptable. A second change in U.S. policy followed in
2016, but the WTO again ruled against the U.S. in 2017, and
authorized Mexico to impose $163M U.S. in trade sanctions
annually against the U.S. until the dolphin-safe label complied
with international trade laws. The U.S. once again responded
with tighter policy and, finally, the WTO found the label to
be compliant. At the time of this writing, the definition of
dolphin safe under the MMPA remains unchanged (i.e., tuna
labeled as dolphin safe were captured using methods other than
setting on dolphins).

The Agreement on the International
Dolphin Conservation Program
Dolphin-Safe Label
In 2001, a voluntary “AIDCP dolphin-safe label” was created by
the Parties to the AIDCP for tuna caught in the eastern Pacific
Ocean9 . The AIDCP dolphin-safe label is only available to vessels
that have a DML and applies to tuna caught during fishing
operations in which no dolphin mortality or serious injury is
observed. The vessel’s fisheries observer makes the determination
regarding whether the catch qualifies as dolphin safe under the
AIDCP just before the tuna is brailed and loaded into wells
on board the vessel. During any fishing trip, a vessel can catch
tuna that qualify as dolphin safe under the AIDCP, and tuna
that do not qualify for the label; each type of tuna is stored in
separate vessel wells and tracked using forms10 that follow the
tuna from capture to market. Thus, tuna caught in association
with dolphins can be certified as dolphin safe through the AIDCP,
even though they do not meet the definition of dolphin safe
under the U.S. label. Because of this difference between the
AIDCP definition of dolphin safe and the U.S definition, tuna
products bearing the AIDCP dolphin safe label are not allowed
in the U.S. market.

Marine Fisheries Certification

http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/AIDCP_Educational-moduleon-the-AIDCP.pdf and http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/AIDCP_
Dolphin-Safe-certification-system.pdf
10
http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/AIDCP_Tuna-TrackingSystem.pdf

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Negative bias in the estimates of abundance can result if dolphin schools on
the survey trackline are not seen by the search team. Should the results of Barlow
(2015) be confirmed with a mark-recapture field study (e.g. Borchers, 2012), this
would imply that abundance is greater than has been previously estimated, which
could have implications for the determination of stock status.

11

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

FIGURE 5 | Components of the sustainability action plan of the Pacific Alliance for Sustainability of Tuna. This plan was a condition of the Marine Stewardship
Council’s certification of tuna caught by setting on dolphins (downloaded from https://www.pacifictunaalliance.org/sustainability/msc-action-plan.html on 15 May
2020).

that disrupting it through dolphin sets and tuna capture may
have negative consequences. Additionally, dolphin sets involve
a high-speed chase, encirclement and confinement in a net,
and release during the backdown process, all of which have
the potential to create disruption and stress. Increased fetal
and/or calf mortality, separation of nursing females and their
calves, decreased fecundity, increased predation, disruption of
mating and other social systems, and ecological disruption have
all been suggested as possible negative effects associated with
setting on dolphins (see below; also, Perryman and Foster,
1980; Au, 1991). Causality between dolphin sets and these
effects has not been established, and arguments have been
made that they would not be expected to be significant12 .
Additionally, studies based on fishery data require some
assumptions which may not be possible to validate. Nonetheless,
research has revealed correlations that are consistent with

survey vessel should perform well for marine mammal surveys
and that the double-platform survey protocol involving drones
is feasible, but that further testing of drone models and camera
equipment will be required (Oedekoven et al., 2021). Although
Mexico has expressed the desire to move forward in the future
with a full survey, the plans for this survey have not been
publicly released.

POSSIBLE EFFECTS OF THE FISHERY IN
ADDITION TO ENTANGLEMENT
MORTALITY
Tuna and dolphins in the ETP naturally co-occur in large
aggregations. Presumably, they derive mutual benefits from coschooling. Data from tagged individuals show that both tuna
and dolphins join and leave these multi-species aggregations
on a fluid and daily basis (Scott et al., 2012), but the
prevalence of this association in the ETP raises the possibility

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

12

https://iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/AIDCP_%20Report%20to%20the%
20US%20Secretary%20of%20Commerce.pdf

12

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

activity nearby in space and time. They also found that recent
exposure to purse seine sets was significantly lower for pregnant
as compared with non-pregnant females.
The degree to which these effects may have populationlevel consequences is associated with the degree to which the
fishery interacts with dolphins individually, and at the population
level. Evidence that individual dolphins experience multiple
sets in their lifetimes dates at least to the 1970s. A 1976
research cruise designed to refine fishing methods and gear,
also incorporated behavioral studies of dolphins. This research
indicated that dolphins may learn from exposure to dolphin
sets, as evidenced by apparent hiding underwater in response
to an approaching purse-seiner, avoiding encirclement through
maneuvers that made it difficult to herd them into the net, and
once in the net, congregating away from the vessel and net walls,
and moving to the apex of the net before backdown (Pryor
and Norris, 1978). More recent research has shown that evasive
behavior of dolphins has increased over time and was strongest
where fishing was most intense (Lennert-Cody and Scott, 2005).
Reilly et al. (2005) used mean values from 1998 to 2000 and
estimated that there were over 5,000 sets on northeastern offshore
spotted dolphins per year, resulting in 6.8 million dolphins
chased and 2.0 million dolphins encircled in purse-seine nets
annually. For eastern spinner dolphins, the numbers were about
2,500 sets per year, resulting in 2.5 million dolphins chased, and
300,000 dolphins captured annually. When divided by the mean
estimated abundances during the same years, a northeastern
offshore spotted dolphin was chased 10.6 times and captured 3.2
times per year on average, and an eastern spinner dolphin chased
5.6 and captured 0.7 times per year.

the hypothesis that chase and encirclement result in negative
impacts on dolphins.
For example, in many dolphin schools encircled by purseseine nets, dependent calves were missing (Archer et al., 2001).
Based on an analysis of 77,361 individuals from two spotted
dolphin stocks killed in 9,397 sets between 1973 and 1990,
75–95% of lactating females did not have their nursing calves
with them (Borchers, 2012). The estimated total “calf deficit”
ranged from 10 s to 8300 calves per year and, assuming these
dependent calves did not survive separation from their mothers,
represented a 14% increase above the number of calves killed
as reported by fisheries observers. A possible mechanism to
explain this calf deficit is that females with dependent calves are
separated during the chase prior to the set of the purse-seine net
(Noren and Edwards, 2007). In bottlenose dolphins, the normal
echelon swimming position of a calf is energetically beneficial to
a calf, but costly to a mother (Noren, 2008, 2013; Noren et al.,
2008). Because the chase is a fast-moving, chaotic environment
(National Research Council, 1992), it may be difficult for mothers
and calves to maintain their normal swimming positions. As
well, there are multiple points during the fishing process when
calves could be separated from the mothers and not recorded
as observed mortality, should they die later as a result of the
separation (Archer et al., 2001).
Negative relationships between fishing activity and dolphin
reproductive rates have also been documented by several studies.
Based on tissue samples collected by observers, Perrin and
Henderson (1984) compared reproductive rates and ages at
sexual maturity in eastern spinner dolphins among areas with
different amounts of dolphin fishing, and Barlow (1985) and
Chivers and Myrick (1993) did the same for northeastern offshore
spotted dolphins. Their expectations were that the more heavily
fished, and therefore more depleted, dolphin populations would
show density-dependent responses, with higher reproductive
rates and younger ages at sexual maturity. In fact, they found
the opposite, negative relationships between fishing activity and
metrics associated with dolphin reproductive rates. Perrin and
Mesnick (2003) quantified that sexual dimorphism was high and
testis size low for eastern spinner dolphins relative to other
populations of this species, indicating a polygynous mating
system. They concluded that social disruption of eastern spinner
dolphin schools associated with chase and encirclement in the
purse-seine fishery could negatively impact reproductive output,
especially if dominant males were removed from schools. In an
analysis of photographs of entire schools of spotted and spinner
dolphins taken from a research vessel-based helicopter from 1987
through 2003, Cramer et al. (2008) found an inverse correlation
between the annual proportion of calves in a school (a proxy for
reproductive rate) and the annual number of purse seine sets for
spotted dolphins (but not spinners). They also found an inverse
correlation between the length of calves at independence (a proxy
for duration of nursing) and the annual number of purse seine
sets, again for spotted dolphins but not spinners. Finally, Kellar
et al. (2013) analyzed hormone levels from 212 skin and blubber
biopsy samples from female spotted dolphins collected between
1998 and 2003. They found that the proportion of pregnant
females in a school was negatively related to an index of fishing

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

DISCUSSION: REMAINING
CHALLENGES AND LESSONS LEARNED
Remaining Challenges
Absolute abundance of dolphins has featured prominently in the
context of evaluating the impact of the fishery and establishing
international and U.S. management schemes. In particular,
absolute abundance estimates have been used in population
dynamics models to evaluate dolphin stock status, and to
determine per-stock per-year mortality limits (AIDCP Annex
III)13 . Historically, these estimates have been based on fisheriesindependent surveys conducted by NOAA, but the most recent
of these was conducted in 2006 (see below). Previous attempts to
develop indices of relative abundance from fisheries-dependent
observer data (Buckland and Anganuzzi, 1988; Lennert-Cody
et al., 2016) have proven problematic because of non-random
distribution of search effort relative to dolphin abundance and
time-varying biases associated with changes in fisher search
behavior. It is unlikely that other methods of assessing stock
status, such as close-kin genetics, will be available in the near
13

The per-stock per-year mortality limit for each stock is based on the lower bound
of the confidence interval on abundance (Barlow et al., 1995; Inter-American
Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC], 2006). Should the annual mortality exceed
the limit for a stock, all sets on that stock, and on any mixed-species dolphin
schools that contain that stock, are prohibited for that year.

13

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

co-schooling tuna and dolphins through the purse-seine
setting process.

future (Johnson et al., 2018). It is, therefore, generally agreed
that there is an ongoing need for fisheries-independent surveys
to estimate absolute abundance of dolphins.
Conducting fisheries-independent surveys requires significant
funding; the lack of such funding largely explains the long time
since the most recent survey. The cost of a single (1 year),
two-vessel survey comparable to those conducted by NOAA
and incorporating drone-related methodological improvements
has been estimated at US$11M–$15M (Oedekoven et al.,
2018). Recommendations have been made to conduct
back-to-back surveys over several years to obtain pooled
estimates of abundance with greater precision than that of
single-year estimates (Oedekoven et al., 2018), which would
greatly increase costs. In-kind contributions, particularly
for vessels, could potentially reduce survey costs by roughly
US$3M per vessel, but this could leave the survey schedule
vulnerable to the fiscal status and internal research priorities of
a few countries.
Ultimately, a stable plan for long-term funding of fisheriesindependent dolphin surveys is needed. Critical to its
development is a thorough review of the benefits of current
bycatch mitigation measures relative to their costs. An evaluation
of trade-offs associated with maintaining 100% observer coverage
on large purse-seine vessels (currently requiring on the order
of U.S. $1.6M annually) would be particularly insightful.
Quantitative analysis of the level of observer coverage necessary
to estimate total fleet bycatch with a specified precision, absent
a substantial observer effect (vessels following all protocols to
minimize dolphin mortality only when an observer is present),
would allow for informed dialogue among all stakeholders
regarding tradeoffs between costs, goals, and resources. Related
is the possibility of data collection by Electronic Monitoring
Systems (EMS) as a means of evaluating bycatch mitigation
efforts on vessels/trips that do not carry a human observer.
Although bycatch enumeration is not currently possible
with EMS, EMS appear capable of collecting data on some
operational aspects of dolphin sets, including the start time
of chase and backdown, and the presence of net canopies, net
collapses and high-mortality sets (Román et al., 2020). Finally,
a review should also consider the need for other data types.
For example, life history data are important for estimating age
distributions and reproductive rates, but these data have not
been collected since the mid-1990s (Scott et al., 2018). In the
absence of absolute abundance estimates, stock mortality limits
have been calculated from projections of absolute abundance
obtained from population dynamics models. These models
would likely benefit from biological data that represent the
current population.
The strong emphasis currently placed on bycatch mitigation,
with a goal to reduce it to near zero, presents an interesting
philosophical, and perhaps practical issue. This emphasis, and
reliance on observers for enforcement, may distract from other,
perhaps equally important issues. These include development of
a long-term data base of biological information which might
be used to help monitor stock status, more deeply investigating
potential effects of the fishery other than entanglement mortality,
and conducting research on the ecological impact of separating

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Lessons Learned
The six decades of catching tuna by setting on dolphins, and the
multidisciplinary efforts to mitigate dolphin mortality associated
with this fishery have been filled with successes and failures. We
find a number of clear themes in these successes and failures
that may provide transferable lessons to bycatch mitigation
efforts in general.
First, the most significant successes in decreasing bycatch can
be attributed to modifications in fishing gear and fishing practices
(see Squires et al., 2021). Most of these were implemented by
the fishery itself almost as soon as the practice of setting on
dolphins began, and were continually improved through time,
albeit supported and improved by scientists associated with the
U.S. government and IATTC.
Second, placing the fate of a vessel in its own hands
has been a powerful incentive to effect reduction of bycatch
mortality. In particular, the establishment of DMLs proved to be
remarkably successful because these limits were implemented on
a vessel-specific basis, thereby rewarding each vessel captain for
reducing dolphin mortality with the opportunity to continue to
set on dolphins.
Third, impacts of a fishery on non-target species may extend
beyond entanglement mortality. Rich data and rigorous science
show strong correlations between dolphin sets and increased
fetal and/or calf mortality, and decreased fecundity of dolphins
associated with these sets.
Fourth, science has been a powerful ally, but also an excuse
for inaction. Research has guided modifications to fishing gear
and fishing practices that have lowered dolphin mortality; field
and analytical methods have provided a means to assess dolphin
abundance and trends; data indicating the potential for effects of
the fishery in addition to entanglement mortality have provided
plausible explanations for the apparent slowed recovery of
dolphin populations. Yet the scientific process is not quick and
not certain. For example, by the time science provided abundance
estimates that resulted in a formal listing of depleted under the
MMPA, the most significant reductions in dolphin mortality had
long since occurred. And despite unprecedented effort (Kaschner
et al., 2012), fishery-independent abundance and trend estimates
are still associated with high levels of uncertainty. The lesson
is that timely management action could require decisions to be
made in the face of indicative, but less-than-conclusive, data. It is
in this context that the Precautionary Principle is relevant (e.g.,
Kriebel et al., 2001).
Fifth, unilateral regulation is often inadequate if it does not
reflect, and is not consistent with, a multilateral one. This is
obvious in the case of the ETP yellowfin tuna purse-seine fishery
that is practiced by multiple nations in multiple jurisdictional
regions, and for which the multilateral regulatory framework is
that developed and implemented under the AIDCP and, for the
IATTC, the 2003 Antigua Convention. Additionally, the global
nature of trade means that even in cases where a fishery is
more regional, unilateral regulation that would be adequate in
that context may still be inadequate in a broader one. Related

14

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

are differences between nations in culture and institutions that
can lead to significant misunderstanding. For example, legal
and institutional orders differ between member nations of the
IATTC, and in the context of dolphin-safe, many of these nations
could not fully understand how the U.S. Congress and courts
could override agreements that had been previously negotiated
in multilateral settings. For its part, the U.S. did not fully
appreciate the subsequent sense of being let down that was felt
by their negotiating partners who also considered that a formal
international commitment had been breached.
And finally, extraction of marine living resources, and
incidental impacts associated with that extraction, occurs even
in the most remote parts of the world’s oceans. This is a given;
sustainability in resource extraction, including maintaining
healthy marine ecosystems, should be the goal. This is certainly
not a new concept; we choose to emphasize and support it here.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
TG synthesized existing data from multiple sources to
construct Figure 2. CL-C provided fact-checking pertaining
to the fishery and international policy. LB wrote the first
and synthesized subsequent drafts of the manuscript. All
authors contributed to conception of the manuscript, wrote
sections, contributed to revision, read, and approved the
submitted version.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jean-François Pulvenis, Brad Wiley, and Michael
Scott for their thorough reviews and comments which greatly
improved this paper.

REFERENCES

Bratten, D. A. (1983). Reducing Dolphin Mortality Incidental to Purse-Seining for
Tunas in the Eastern Pacific Ocean: A Review of the Tuna-Dolphin Fishing
Gear Program of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission. Report of the
International Whaling Commission 33 (SC/34/SM3). The International Whaling
Commission, The Red House, Station Road, Histon, Cambridge, CB4 4NP,
599–602.
Brower, K. (1989). The destruction of dolphins. The Atlantic Magazine Monthly
July 35–58.
Buckland, S. T., and Anganuzzi, A. A. (1988). Estimated trends of abundance of
dolphins associated with tuna in the eastern tropical Pacific. Rep. Int. Whaling
Comm. 38, 411–437.
Chivers, S. J., and Myrick, A. C. (1993). Comparison of age at sexual maturity
and other reproductive parameters for two stocks of spotted dolphin, Stenella
attenuata. Fish. Bull. 91, 611–618.
Coan, A. L. Jr., Wallace, K. E., and Jackson, A. R. (1992). Differences in dolphin
mortality rates in night and day sets for the US eastern tropical Pacific tuna
purse seine fishery. Mar. Fish. Rev. 54, 7–14.
Coe, J. M., Holts, D. B., and Butler, R. W. (1984). The “tuna-porpoise” problem:
NMFS dolphin mortality reduction research, 1970-81. Mar. Fish. Rev. 46,
18–33.
Cramer, K. L., Perryman, W. L., and Gerrodette, T. (2008). Declines
in reproductive output in two dolphin populations depleted by
the yellowfin tuna purse-seine fishery. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 369,
273–285. doi: 10.3354/meps07606
DeMaster, D. P., Sisson, J., Stevensen, L., and Montgomery, S. (1992). Report of the
Third and Final Meeting to Review Progress in Reducing Dolphin Mortality in
the ETP Purse Seine Fishery for Tunas, Long Beach, California, 13-14 November
1991. NOAA Administrative Report SWR 92-7. Available online at: https://
repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/26902 (accessed August 6, 2021).
Gerrodette, T., and Forcada, J. (2005). Non-recovery of two spotted and spinner
dolphin populations in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.
291, 1–21. doi: 10.3354/meps291001
Gerrodette, T., Watters, G., Perryman, W., and Ballance, L. (2008). . Estimates of
2006 Dolphin Abundance in the Eastern Tropical Pacific, with Revised Estimates
from 1986-2003. NOAA Technical Memorandum NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFSC422. Available online at: https://swfsc.noaa.gov/publications/PubBIN#/search/
(accessed August 6, 2021).
Gosliner, M. L. (1999). “The tuna-dolphin controversy,” in Conservation and
Management of Marine Mammals, eds J. R. Twiss and R. R. Reeves
(Washington,DC: Smithsonian Institution Press), 120–155.
Hall, M. A. (1996). On by-catches. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 6, 319–352.
Hedley, C. (2001). The 1998 agreement on the international dolphin conservation
program: recent developments in the tuna-dolphin controversy in the eastern
Pacific Ocean. Ocean Dev. Int. Law 32, 71–92. doi: 10.1080/0090832015050
2203
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC] (1993). Annual Report
of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, 1992. Available online

Allen, R., Joseph, J., and Squires, D. (2010). “Managing world tuna fisheries
with emphasis on rights-based management,” in Handbook of Marine
Fisheries Conservation and Management, eds R. Q. Grafton, R. Hillborn,
D. Squires, M. Tait, and M. Williams (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
698–712.
Archer, F., Gerrodette, T., Chivers, S., and Jackson, A. (2004). Annual estimates of
the unobserved incidental kill of pantropical spotted dolphin (Stenella attenuata
attenuata) calves in the tuna purse-seine fishery of the eastern tropical Pacific.
Fish. Bull. 102, 233–244.
Archer, F., Gerrodette, T., Dizon, A., Abella, K., and Southern, Š (2001).
Unobserved kill of nursing dolphin calves in a tuna purse-seine
fishery. Mar. Mam. Sci. 17, 540–554. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-7692.2001.tb0
1003.x
Au, D. W., and Pitman, R. L. (1986). Seabird interactions with dolphins and
tuna in the eastern tropical Pacific. Condor 88, 304–317. doi: 10.2307/136
8877
Au, D. W. K. (1991). Polyspecific nature of tuna schools: sharks, dolphin, and
seabird associates. Fish. Bull. 89, 343–354. doi: 10.1038/354343a0
Ballance, L. T., Pitman, R. L., and Reilly, S. B. (1997). Seabird community structure
along a productivity gradient: importance of competition and energetic
constraint. Ecology 78, 1502–1518. doi: 10.1890/0012-9658(1997)078[1502:
scsaap]2.0.co;2
Barham, E., Taguchi, W., and Reilly, S. (1977). Porpoise rescue methods in the
yellowfin purse seine fishery and the importance of Medina panel mesh size.
Mar. Fish. Rev 39, 1–10.
Barlow, J. (1985). Variability, biases, and trends in reproductive rates of spotted
dolphins, Stenella attenuata. Fish. Bull. 83, 657–669.
Barlow, J. (2015). Inferring trackline detection probabilities, g(0), for cetaceans
from apparent densities in different survey conditions. Mar. Mam. Sci. 31,
923–943. doi: 10.1111/mms.12205
Barlow, J., Swartz, S. L., Eagle, C., and Wade, P. R. (1995). U.S. Marine
Mammal Stock Assessments: Guidelines for Preparation, Background, and a
Summary of the 1995 Assessments. NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFSOPR-6. Silver Spring, MD: U.S. Deptartment of Commerce, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Office of
Protected Resources, 73.
Bayliff, W. H. (2001). Organization, Functions and Achievements of the
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission. Inter-American Tropical
Tuna Commission Special Report 13. Available onlline at: http:
//www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/SpecialReports/_English/No-13-2001-BAYLIFF,
%20WILLIAM%20H_Organization,%20functions,%20and%20achievements%
20of%20the%20Inter-American%20Tropical%20Tuna%20Commission.pdf
(accessed August 6, 2021).
Borchers, D. (2012). A non-technical overview of spatially explicit capturerecapture models. J. Ornithol. 152, 435–444.

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

15

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

at: http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/AnnualReports/_English/IATTC-AnnualReport_1992.pdf (accessed August 6, 2021).
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC] (2002). Scientific Report of
the on the Status of Dolphins Stocks in the Eastern Pacific Ocean. IATTC Report –
Oct 2002. Available online at: https://iattc.org/PDFFiles/AIDCP/_English/
AIDCP_%20Report%20to%20the%20US%20Secretary%20of%20Commerce.
pdf
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC] (2006). Technical Workshop
on Calculating NMIN for the Dolphin Stocks of the Eastern Pacific Ocean.
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Special Report 14. Available online
at: http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/SpecialReports/_English/No-14-2006-Staff_
Technical%20workshop%20on%20calculating%20NMIN%20for%20the%
20dolphin%20stocks%20of%20the%20eastern%20Pacific%20Ocean.pdf
(accessed August 6, 2021).
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC] (2009). Updated Estimates
of Nmin and stock Mortality Limits, Document SAB-07-05. 7th Meeting of the
Scientific Advisory Board to the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission.
Available online at: https://www.iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2009/AIDCP-22/
Docs/_English/SAB-07-05_Updated%20estimates%20of%20Nmin%20and%
20Stock%20Mortality%20Limits.pdf (accessed August 6, 2021).
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC] (2015). Annual Report
of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, 2010. Available online
at: http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/AnnualReports/_English/IATTC-AnnualReport_2010.pdf (accessed August 6, 2021).
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC] (2019). Report on the
Tuna Fishery, Stocks, and Ecosystem in the Eastern Pacific Ocean in 2018.
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Fishery Status Report 17. Available
online at: http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/FisheryStatusReports/_English/No17-2019_Tuna%20fishery,%20stocks,%20and%20ecosystem%20in%20the%
20eastern%20Pacific%20Ocean%20in%202018.pdf (accessed August 6, 2021).
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission [IATTC] (2020). Report
on the International Dolphin Conservation Program. Inter-American
Tropical Tuna Commission Document AIDCP-41-02. Available online
at:
https://iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2020/IATTC-95/AIDCP-41/
_English/AIDCP-41-02_Report%20on%20International%20Dolphin%
20Conservation%20Program.pdf (accessed August 6, 2021).
Johnson, K. F., Punt, A. E., and Lennert-Cody, C.E. (eds). (2018). Report of the
Workshop on Methods for Monitoring the Status of Eastern Tropical Pacific
Ocean Dolphin Populations. Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Special
Report 22. Available online at: http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/SpecialReports/
_English/No-22-2018-JOHNSON%20KELLI%20FAYE,%20Andre%20E.
%20Punt%20and%20Cleridy%20E.%20Lennert%20Cody_Report%20of%
20the%20workshop%20on%20methods%20for%20monitoring%20the%
20status%20of%20ETP%20dolphin%20populations.pdf (accessed August 6,
2021).
Joseph, J. (1994). The tuna-dolphin controversy in the eastern Pacific Ocean:
biological, economic and political impacts. Ocean Dev. Int. Law 25, 1–30. doi:
10.1080/00908329409546023
Kaschner, K., Quick, N. J., Jewell, R., Williams, R., and Harris, C. M. (2012).
Global coverage of cetacean line-transect surveys: status quo, data gaps
and future challenges. PLoS One 7:e44075. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0044075
Kellar, N. M., Trego, M. L., Chivers, S. J., and Archer, F. I. (2013). Pregnancy
patterns of pantropical spotted dolphins (Stenella attenuata) in the eastern
tropical Pacific determined from hormonal analysis of blubber biopsies and
correlations with the purse-seine tuna fishery. Mar. Biol. 160, 3113–3124. doi:
10.1007/s00227-013-2299-0
Kriebel, D., Tickner, J., Epstein, P., Lemons, J., Levins, R., Loechler,
E. L., et al. (2001). The precautionary principle in environmental
science. Environ. Health Perspect. 109, 871–876. doi: 10.1289/ehp.0110
9871
Leeper, E. M. (1976). Major research effort probes tuna-porpoise bond. BioScience
26, 533–584. doi: 10.2307/1297266
Lennert-Cody, C. E., Maunder, M. N., Fiedler, P. C., Minami, M., Gerrodette,
T., Rusin, J., et al. (2016). Purse-seine vessels as platforms for monitoring
the population status of dolphin species in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean:
the use of fishing vessels as scientific platforms. Fish. Res. 178, 101–113. doi:
10.1016/j.fishres.2015.10.005

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Lennert-Cody, C. E., Minami, M., and Hall, M. A. (2004). Incidental mortality of
dolphins in the eastern Pacific Ocean purse-seine fishery: correlates and their
spatial association. J. Cetacean Res. Manag. 6, 151–163.
Lennert-Cody, C. E., and Scott, M. D. (2005). Spotted dolphin evasive response in
relation to fishing effort. Mar. Mam. Sci. 21, 13–28. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-7692.
2005.tb01205.x
Leslie, M. S., Archer, F. I., and Morin, P. A. (2019). Mitogenomic differentiation
in spinner (Stenella longirostris) and pantropical spotted dolphins
(S. attenuata) from the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. Mar. Mam. Sci. 35,
522–551.
Lo, N. C. H., and Smith, T. D. (1971). Dolphins in the eastern tropical Pacific,
1959-72. Fish. Bull. 84:27.
National Research Council (1992). Dolphins and the Tuna Industry. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
Noren, S. R. (2008). Infant carrying behaviour in dolphins: costly parental care in
an aquatic environment. Funct. Ecol. 22, 284–288. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2435.
2007.01354.x
Noren, S. R. (2013). Altered swimming gait and performance of dolphin mothers:
implications for interactions with tuna purse-seine fisheries. Mar. Ecol. Prog.
Ser. 482, 255–263. doi: 10.3354/meps10286
Noren, S. R., Biedenbach, G., Redfern, J. V., and Edwards, E. F. (2008). Hitching
a ride: the formation locomotion strategy of dolphin calves. Funct. Ecol. 22,
278–283. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2435.2007.01353.x
Noren, S. R., and Edwards, E. F. (2007). Physiological and behavioral development
in delphinid calves: implications for calf separation and mortality due to tuna
purse-seine sets. Mar. Mam. Sci. 23, 15–29.
Oedekoven, C. S., Buckland, S. T., Marshall, L., and Lennert-Cody, C. E. (2018).
Design of a Survey for Eastern Tropical Pacific Dolphin Stocks. Inter-American
Tropical Tuna Commission Document MOP-37-02. Available online at:
http://www.iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2018/IATTC-93/Docs/_English/
MOP-37-02_Design%20of%20a%20survey%20for%20eastern%20tropical%
20Pacific%20dolphin%20stocks.pdf (accessed August 6, 2021).
Oedekoven, C. S., McMillan, L., Fatima, S., Harris-Brill, D., Faustino, C., Marshall,
L., et al. (2021). Trial Survey for Eastern Tropical Pacific Dolphins: Project
Report. Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission Special Report 24. Available
online at: https://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/SpecialReports/_English/No-242021-Mulitiple_Trial%20survey%20for%20Eastern%20Tropical%20Pacific%
20dolphins%20Project%20report.pdf (accessed August 6, 2021).
Perrin, W. F. (1968). The porpoise and the tuna. Sea Front. 14, 166–174. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0197220
Perrin, W. F. (1969). Using porpoises to catch tuna. World Fish. 18, 42–45.
Perrin, W. F., and Henderson, J. R. (1984). Growth and reproductive
rates in two populations of spinner dolphins, Stenella longirostris, with
different histories of exploitation. Rep. Int. Whaling Comm. Spec. Issue 6,
417–430.
Perrin, W. F., and Mesnick, S. L. (2003). Sexual ecology of the spinner dolphin,
Stenella longirostris: geographic variation in mating system. Mar. Mam. Sci. 19,
462–483. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-7692.2003.tb01315.x
Perryman, W. L., and Foster, T. C. (1980). Preliminary Report on Predation by Small
Whales, Mainly the False Killer Whale Pseudorca crassidens, on dolphins (Stenella
spp. and Delphinus delphis) in the Eastern Tropical Pacific. Southwest Fisheries
Center Administrative Report LJ-80-05. La Jolla, CA: National Marine Fisheries
Service.
Pryor, K., and Norris, K. S. (1978). The tuna/porpoise problem: behavioral aspects.
Oceanus 21, 31–37.
Ralston, F. (1977). A Workshop to Assess Research Related to the Porpoise/ Tuna
Problem, 28 February, 1-2 March. Southwest Fisheries Center Administrative
Report No. lJ-77-15. La Jolla, CA: Southwest Fisheries Service, National Marine
Fisheries Service.
Reilly, S. B., Donahue, M. A., Gerrodette, T., Forney, K., Wade, P., Ballance,
L., et al. (2005). Report of the Scientific Research Program Under the
International Dolphin Conservation Program Act. NOAA Technical
Memorandum NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFSC-372. Available online at:
https://swfsc-publications.fisheries.noaa.gov/publications/TM/SWFSC/
NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFSC-372.PDF (accessed August 6, 2021).
Román, M., Lopez, J., Lennert-Cody, C. E., Ureña, E., and Aires-da-Silva,
A. (2020). An Electronic Monitoring System for the tuna fisheries in
the eastern Pacific Ocean: Objectives and standards. Inter-American

16

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

Ballance et al.

The Tuna-Dolphin Problem

Tropical Tuna Commission Document SAC-11-10. Available online at:
https://www.iattc.org/Meetings/Meetings2020/SAC-11/Docs/_English/SAC11-10_Standards%20for%20electronic%20monitoring%20(EM).pdf (accessed
November 8, 2021).
Sakagawa, G. T. (1991). Are U.S. regulations on tuna-dolphin fishing driving
U.S. seiners to foreign-flag registry? N. Am. J. Fish. Manag. 11, 241–252. doi:
10.1577/1548-8675(1991)011<0241:ausrot>2.3.co;2
Scott, M. D., Chivers, S. J., Olson, R. J., Fiedler, P. C., and Holland, K. (2012). Pelagic
predator associations: tuna and dolphins in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean.
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 458, 283–302. doi: 10.3354/meps09740
Scott, M. D., Lennert-Cody, C. E., Gerrodette, T., Chivers, S. J., Danil, K., Hohn,
A. A., et al. (2018). Data Available for Assessing Dolphin Population Status in
the Eastern Tropical Pacific Ocean. Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
Special Report 23. Available online at: http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles/
SpecialReports/_English/No-23-2018-Mulitiple_Data%20available%20for%
20assessing%20dolphin%20population%20status%20in%20the%20ETP.pdf
(accessed August 6, 2021).
Smith, T. D. (1983). Changes in size of three dolphin (Stenella spp.) populations in
the eastern tropical Pacific. Fish. Bull. 81, 1–13.
Southwest Fisheries Center (1975). Progress of Research on Porpoise Mortality
Incidental to Tuna Purse-Seine Fishing for Fiscal Year 1975. Southwest Fisheries
Center Administrative Report No. lJ-75-68. La Jolla, CA: National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Southwest
Fisheries Center.
Squires, D. E., Lent, R., Dutton, P. H., Dagorn, L., and Ballance, L. T. (2021). Credit
systems for bycatch and biodiversity conservation. Front. Mar. Sci. 8:613279.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2021.613279
U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California (2004). Earth Island
Institute et al., v. Donald Evans et al. No. C 03-0007 TEH Order Granting
Plaintiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment and Denying Defendants’ Motion for
Summary Judgment. San Francisco, CA: United States District Court, N.D.
California.

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Wade, P. R. (1993a). Assessment of the Northeastern stock of Offshore Spotted
Dolphin (Stenella attenuata). Southwest Fisheries Science Center Administrative
Report LJ 93-18. La Jolla, CA: NOAA Southwest Fisheries Science
Center.
Wade, P. R. (1993b). Estimation of historical population size of the eastern spinner
dolphin (Stenella longirostris orientalis). Fish. Bull. 91, 775–787.
Wade, P. R., Watters, G. M., Gerrodette, T., and Reilly, S. B. (2007). Depletion
of spotted and spinner dolphins in the eastern tropical Pacific: modeling
hypotheses for their lack of recovery. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 343, 1–14. doi:
10.3354/meps07069
Author Disclaimer: The views expressed in this work are personal to the author
and do not reflect a formal position of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna
Commission.
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2021 Ballance, Gerrodette, Lennert-Cody, Pitman and Squires. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.

17

November 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 754755

