K. KAMOSHIDA/GETTY

COMMENT

Introducing tradeable permits for commercial whaling could actually reduce the number of whales that are caught by countries including Japan.

A market approach
to saving the whales

The future of the International Whaling Commission is tenuous. A ‘whale conservation
market’ might rescue it, say Christopher Costello, Leah R. Gerber and Steven Gaines.

D

espite the International Whaling
Commission’s (IWC) moratorium
on commercial whaling beginning
in 1986, the number of whales taken has
more than doubled since the early 1990s.
Almost 2,000 whales are now harvested each
year — roughly 1,000 for ‘scientific purposes’
(by Japan), 600 by countries that object to
the ban (Norway and Iceland), and 350 for
subsistence (mainly by Denmark, Russia
and the United States)1. Many populations
of large whales have been severely depleted
and continue to be threatened by commercial whaling2.
The persistence of largely unregulated
whaling has sparked heated debate about
whether the IWC, long hamstrung by management and ethics issues, should again
permit formally sanctioned whaling. In
2010, some anti-whaling nations proposed
a compromise: establishing quotas for sanctioned whaling that would still reduce the
overall number of whales taken. After much
wrangling, the deal fell through — largely
because many anti-whaling groups had a

fundamental problem with setting quotas at
all, because they felt that these would appear
to legitimize commercial whaling. Some
people blame Japan for the deal’s collapse,
because the country refused to sign up to a
proposed zero quota on whale catches in the
Southern Ocean.
We propose an alternative path forward
that could break the deadlock: quotas that
can be bought and sold, creating a market
that would be economically, ecologically and
socially viable for whalers and whales alike.
Because conservationists could bid for quotas, whalers could profit from whales even
without harvesting the animals. A market
would therefore open the door to reducing
mortality without needing to battle over
whether whaling is honourable or shameful.

TRIED AND TESTED

Market approaches to environmental protection have expanded substantially over the
past 20 years. When carefully designed, they
can be remarkably successful. Emissions
trading markets for air pollutants such as

sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides have
reduced emissions more, and at a lower cost,
than traditional regulations in the United
States. Conservation and wetland mitigation-banking programmes have resulted in
more than 200,000 protected acres of habitat
and have catalysed investment in conservation by the private sector. And fisheries managed with individual transferable quotas, in
which sustainable levels of catch are divided
and traded between permit-holding fishermen, in countries such as New Zealand,
Iceland and Canada, have simultaneously
allowed fisheries to continue and stopped
stocks from collapsing.
The concept of auctioning annual whale
catch quotas through a ‘World Whaling
Authority’ was suggested in 1982 (ref. 3).
It was never implemented, however, perhaps
because the concept was ahead of its time
(the first such tools — in fisheries, air pollution and biodiversity — were not established
until the 1990s), and perhaps because it would
have required whalers to purchase a privilege
that they were used to receiving for free.

1 2 JA N UA RY 2 0 1 2 | VO L 4 8 1 | N AT U R E | 1 3 9

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

COMMENT
A whale-conservation market would be
different. In such a system, ‘whale shares’
would be allocated in sustainable numbers to
all member nations of the IWC, who would
have the choice of exercising them, leaving
them unused for a year or retiring them in
perpetuity. The shares would be tradable in
a carefully controlled global market, perhaps
with the restriction that members could not
trade whale products with non-members.
The number of whales hunted would depend
on who owned the shares. At one extreme
(in which whalers purchase all the shares),
whales would be harvested to the agreed sustainable level. At the other extreme (where
conservationists purchase all the shares), all
whales would be protected from harvest.
There are multiple challenges in getting
such a scheme to work, including agreeing
on sustainable quotas and on how shares
should be allocated. We believe that the IWC
is up to the task.

J. WATSON/AFP/GETTY

KILLER QUESTION

Various well-established algorithms could be
used to identify sustainable harvest levels for
whales4. For example, the IWC’s ‘catch limit
algorithm’, which sets commercial quotas
for baleen whales, could be applied more
broadly. The US Marine Mammal Protection
Act mandates a more conservative approach,
known as ‘potential biological removal’, to
establish sustainable take levels for marine
mammals in US waters. Although negotiations to set binding catch quotas, such as the
deliberations by IWC members in 2010, have
not led to consensus, the major reason has
not been objections to the proposed quota
numbers per se, but a more philosophical
objection to the idea of setting quotas at
all. Allowing the quotas to be traded, as we
advocate, means that they would not necessarily lead to whale deaths or national caps
on takes, appeasing both parties.
The initial allocation of whale shares is a
potentially challenging issue. In the realm
of climate change, the process of divvying
up global emissions targets into national
responsibilities has proven intractable, with
developing nations arguing that stringent targets will inhibit growth, and others arguing
that their circumstances, from particularly
cold winters to vast forests acting as carbon
sinks, justify higher targets. Allocation has
been contentious in fisheries too, where it
gives a highly valuable asset to the recipient.
In practice, in both the emissions and fisheries markets, the initial allocations almost
always coincide with historical use. Research
into the global markets for air pollutants5 and
fish6 offers many potential solutions to the
whaling allocation problem. One possibility
would be to divide the majority of the quota
between whaling and non-whaling nations
based on historical whaling patterns, leaving the rest for open auction, the proceeds of

which would go to whale conservation.
Handing out shares within nations has had
a greater history of success, and is likely to
be less contentious. Initial allocations within
non-whaling countries would probably go to
conservation trusts that are focused on protecting particular species. Quota rights could
be limited in duration, say for ten years with
the possibility of renewal, or in perpetuity
for subsistence groups.
Policing such a market would not be simple.
But a global vessel registry and carefully
monitored trading would help to ensure
system integrity. Requiring prices and trades
to be made public would bring transparency
to an industry that has long been accused of
back-room deals and vote trading.
The ‘whale share’ approach stands a good
chance of being acceptable both to anti- and
to pro-whaling constituents. If quotas are
set properly, transactions would reduce the
number of whales harvested, quite possibly
to zero, unlike existing protocols, which seem
to be increasing the catches. Whalers would
be suitably compensated. And because trades
are voluntary, the market would have the
potential to make all parties better off, and
simultaneously improve whale conservation.
A fervent anti-whaler will be quick to argue
that you cannot and should not put a price on
the life of a whale; a species should be protected irrespective of its economic value. But
unless all nations can be convinced or forced
to adopt this view, whaling will continue. It is
precisely because of the lack of a real price tag
in the face of different values that anti-whaling operations have had such limited success.
A generous estimate of the total annual
profit from all global commercial whaling
activity is US$31 million. Whalers spend
millions of dollars to harvest these whales,
many of which are then sold on global markets. Recent reports suggest that even some
whales hunted for subsistence may end up

In a market system, charities could ‘buy’ whales,
rather than spending money campaigning.

1 4 0 | N AT U R E | VO L 4 8 1 | 1 2 JA N UA RY 2 0 1 2

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

for sale elsewhere7, suggesting that whale
meat is replaceable as a necessary source of
protein for some communities.
Simple calculations based on current
market prices, whale sizes and whaling costs,
suggest that the per-whale profit for whalers is in the ballpark of $13,000 for a minke
whale to $85,000 for a fin whale. Whale prices
should therefore be within reach of conservation groups and even some individuals.
A conservative estimate of the amount
spent annually by non-profit organizations
on anti-whaling (based on the expenditures
of Greenpeace USA, Greenpeace International, Sea Shepherd
“If quotas are Conservation Society,
set properly,
WWF International
transactions
and WWF UK) is
would reduce $25 million. Rather
than supporting antithe number
whaling protests and
of whales
movements (and their
harvested.”
accompanying carbon
footprint), this money could be used to
purchase whales, arguably with the same
or better effect. Sea Shepherd, for example,
estimates that its multimillion-dollar 2008
campaign saved about 350 minke whales in
Antarctic waters. By our calculations, those
whales could have been purchased for less
than $4 million.
Properly designed, a whale market could
accommodate important concerns such as
the by-catch of whales in fisheries or whale
ship strikes. It could even be integrated with
other market approaches, such as a recent
proposal to apply carbon credits to live
whales8. By placing an appropriate price tag
on the life of a whale, a whale conservation
market provides an immediate and tangible
way to save them. ■
Christopher Costello and Steven Gaines
are at the Bren School of Environmental
Science and Management, University of
California, Santa Barbara, California
93106, USA. Leah R. Gerber is in the
Ecology, Evolution and Environmental
Sciences faculty, School of Life Sciences,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona
85281, USA.
e-mail: costello@bren.ucsb.edu
1. International Whaling Commission Catch Limits
& Catches Taken; available at http://go.nature.
com/rcnfq5
2. Gerber, L. R., DeMaster, D. & Roberts, S. Am. Sci.
88, 316–324 (2000).
3. Clark, C. W. & Lamberson, R. Mar. Pol. 6,
103–120 (1982).
4. Haltuch, M. A., Punt, A. E. & Dorn, M. W. Fish. Res.
100, 42–56 (2009).
5. Goulder, L., Hafstead, M. & Dworsky, M. J. Environ.
Econ. Manage. 60, 161–181 (2010).
6. Anderson, T., Arnason, R. & Libecap, G. Annu. Rev.
Res. Econ. 3, 159–179 (2011).
7. Black, R. Greenland whale hunt ‘commercial’
BBC News (17 June 2008); available at http://
go.nature.com/vspyd5
8. Pershing, A. J. et al. PLoS ONE 5, e12444 (2010).

