Chapter 2

BIOECONOMICS OF RENEWABLE RESOURCE USE
JAMES E. WILEN
University of California

1. Introduction
One of the characteristics of natural resource economics which makes it both
interesting and difficult is its heavy reliance on noneconomic as well as economic
concepts. Basic notions from the fields of law, population biology, petroleum
engineering, ecology, hydrology, entomology and other fields are increasingly
appearing in the literature of the field. Over the past two decades the field has
expanded both in breadth of coverage and also in depth of conceptual development so that a well-rounded natural resources economist needs to have considerable knowledge not only about sophisticated techniques in economics but also in
several other outside fields.
In light of these facts, the task of writing a survey chapter on something like the
bioeconomics of renewable resources runs a risk of ending up looking like the
Platte River (a mile wide and an inch deep) or too concentrated in economics to
inform the principal readers (economists presumably) much about relevant concepts in the outside discipline. Accordingly, this chapter attempts to walk a fine
line of being both compact and comprehensive in discussing relevant concepts
from economics and biology. In addition, an attempt has been made to identify
unifying threads and areas of potential future development in bioeconomics.
This chapter has four major parts. Section 2 discusses the economic concepts
which appear to be central to analyzing biological situations typically encountered. The concepts are drawn from capital theory and cover two classes of
problems: a continuous investment/disinvestment problem and a point-input
point-output problem where timing of a single action is important. Section 3 then
reviews relevant concepts from biology which affect the nature of the corresponding bioeconomic problem. The section is written with most emphasis on the range
of population growth mechanisms we see in natural systems and the individual
characteristics that have evolved to produce such population mechanisms. Section
4 then draws material from Sections 2 and 3 together in a review of some different
bioeconomic models and their conclusions. Section 5 concludes by discussing
likely directions of future research.
Handbook of Natural Resource and Energy Economics, vol. I, edited by A. V. Kneese and J.L. Sweeney
© Elsevier Science PublishersB. V., 1985
61

62

J. E. Wilen

2. Economics and renewable resource use
2. 1. Renewable resources as stocks of capital
In natural systems with and without the presence of man, evolutionary forces
have filled spaces with a diversity of populations of plants, insects, fish, mammals,
and birds. Although there is disagreement over where evolution is leading the
system in the long run, there is some understanding of the mechanisms of
competition and symbiosis between these populations and the elements which act
to control given population sizes in their particular patches of space.
From the point of view of man as the ultimate user of these resources,
populations of natural organisms are most conveniently viewed as stocks of
capital or assets which provide potential flows of services. Determining how to
maximize benefits from these resources thus becomes a problem of capital
theory - deciding mainly how to utilize this "portfolio" of stocks over time. This
view avoids the ethical issues of whether man has "right" to utilize resources for
his own good (see discussion in Chapter 5 of this Handbook) but it does admit
the possibility that "benign" uses, i.e. leaving the system close to "natural", may
be the best from man's perspective also. In addition, such a view requires that a
system view be taken in order to account for interrelationships among the
populations that make up the portfolio.
The essential questions of modern capital theory are precisely issues of optimal
use of stocks over time. While early writers stressed the "intermediateness" or
"round-about" nature of capital, the critical characteristics of capital which make
it interesting as an economic problem are:
(i) durability
(ii) sluggishness-capital stocks cannot be instantly adjusted without incurring some adjustment costs.
Durability is a crucial distinguishing characteristic of capital since it links past
decisions with current opportunities and also makes future possibilities dependent
on today's decision. Inputs that are flows rather than stocks can be treated in a
sequential series of static decisions since there is no carryover from past decisions
nor impact on the future from current decisions. Hence, durability in relation to
decision periods makes it necessary to initiate intertemporal planning and, in
particular, to forecast the future in order to make the best decision today. In
addition, the fact of capital's durability makes it a store of wealth, i.e. it assumes a
value which carries through time, and as a result the stock may be subject to
speculative decisions as well as pure production-related decisions involving service
flows.
The second characteristic (costly adjustment) is also critical in that it forces the
decision-maker to consider the future in order to spread out the costs of altering
the capital stock. For example, if a firm is using machinery to produce a product

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

63

and it can rent or purchase/resell at any moment at some fixed price per unit
capital, then it can simply wait for all uncertainty about product prices, etc. to be
unveiled and then instantly adjust to meet the desired stock level [Arrow (1964)].
In this case, with no adjustment costs (i.e. costs which rise as the rate of capital
stock adjustment increases), determining a capital stock path (or investment plan)
is really a sequentially static decision problem, requiring no forecasting or
intertemporal planning. On the other hand, if more machines need a larger
building, more labor, etc. then there are adjustment costs C(I), where I is the
investment level, C'(I)> 0 and (critically) C"(I) # 0. Thus if, for example,
C(I) = 12 and the entrepreneur wants to increase the capital stock by 100 units,
the costs of investing immediately will be tenfold the costs of adding 10 units each
year over a ten-year period. The rapid investment policy, of course, will yield
returns earlier and thus we have a classic intertemporal tradeoff problem where
one can incur high adjustment costs to get early higher returns or one can adjust
slower with a returns penalty. The optimal decision depends in a sometimes
complex manner on a balancing of gains from earlier benefits against costs of
rapid adjustment.
In summary, these two characteristics of durability and costly adjustment make
for a difficult intertemporal planning problem. With durability, it is necessary to
know the future profiles of prices, costs, and stock sizes and incorporate them into
optimal decisions at any point in time. Thus, even if there are no adjustment costs
associated with changing the stock in the future, we are still faced with what we
refer to as a timing problem of deciding when to change the stock level. With
positive adjustment costs we face, in addition, an optimal investment/disinvestment problem of deciding how fast to change the stock, since it may be better to
begin increasing or decreasing the stock early in order to spread out adjustment
costs.

Biological and other natural resources obviously fit the above characteristics of
capital stocks. They are durable in that organisms, or the population, or the
species, generally live beyond the interval of the typical planning period. In
addition, since all populations have rates of increases limited by their intrinsic
population biology, they cannot be instantly and costlessly adjusted upwards so
that there are investment adjustment costs (perhaps zero up to certain rates of
increase, infinite thereafter). Some stocks which are clustered and easily harvested
in total (e.g. schooling fish, forests) may be reduced with virtually no increase in
costs but for other resources as stocks thin out it is usually increasingly expensive
to harvest remaining units so that reduction adjustment costs may be increasing
as well. Thus use of natural systems confronts us with both timing and investment/disinvestment problems generally.
2.2. Capitaltheory - basic results

In order to understand the nature of intertemporal problems and the complexities
introduced by the above characteristics, it will be useful to consider a simple

J.E. Wilen

64

model of a firm. The firm produces a product Q which can be sold at price p each
period. The quantity of Q in any period t depends on the quantity of the firm's
capital stock K via the production function

Q,=F(K,),

F'>O,F"<0.

(1)

There are costs C(I,) of adding to the capital stock where I, is the investment
rate. We will assume that capital depreciates at a constant proportional rate r so
that (dK/dt)=k, = I, - rK,. The firm has Ko units of capital initially and wants
to determine the optimal investment plan which maximizes the present value of
profits, or
maxf

[pF(K,)

-

C(I)]e-'dt

s.t.
K, = It - rK,,
where 8 is the discount rate. The solution to this problem depends in an
important way on C(I) and particularly on whether C(I) exhibits adjustment
costs.' Adjustment costs imply that C(I) increases at an increasing rate in I so
that marginal costs of adding capital are increasing with the level of addition. A
reasonable form for C(I) thus might be something like
C(I ) = Pk '

(3)

where Pk is a (minimum) unit price of investment and where P = 1 implies no
adjustment costs and > 1 implies positive adjustment costs.
Consider first the case with / = 1. Then the integrand in (2) becomes

FI(K, I) = pF(K) -Pk' = IA(K, K) =pF(K) - Pk[K+ rK].
Since it costs nothing extra to rapidly adjust the capital stock compared to a
slower adjustment, it obviously is better to adjust it as quickly as possible. The
important issue, however, is what level should the stock be adjusted to? The
answer to this (and a proof that most rapid adjustment is optimal) is provided in
an elegant paper by Spence and Starrett (1975). Let M(K)= pF(K) - PkrK and
let N(K)= -Pk. Spence and Starrett show that for any problem whose augmented integrand (derived by substituting the dynamic constraint into the original integrand) can be written as
HA,(K,

k) = M(K) + N(K)K,

(4)

the optimal solution reduces to one of simply reaching a steady state level
K = K * as quickly as possible. In the problem considered above, if there are no
constraints on I, this would be achieved with an initial "impulse control" with
I = cc or I = - oo that jumps the capital from KO to K*.
1Time subscripts will be dropped from this point forward where the meaning is obvious.

65

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

The optimal level K * is found as follows. Let
S[K(t)] =J

K(

)N(e)de,

sothat S=N(K)K.

(5)

Then, the problem in (2) can be written as
max
J
K, K

[M(K)+N(K)K]e-'dt=fo0 [M(K)+S]e-'dt.

(6)

But the second part of the RHS integral can be integrated by parts to yield:
J Se-'dt

S [K(t)] -'dt,

=8

0

(7)

0

so that (6) reduces to
max f

[M(K) +S(K)

e- a

'dt=f

V(K)e-tdt.

(8)

The important thing to note is that the original problem in K and I reduces to a
simple problem in K alone. Obviously, (8) is maximized by making K follow a
most rapid approach path (MRAP) to K = K * defined by V'(K *) = 0.2 Thus, we
have an important rule applicable to any capital problem; namely, if by substituting the constraint into the original integrand we have as an augmented integrand
7r(K, K) which is linear in K, i.e. as in (4), then the optimal solution is a MRAP
to K * defined by (8).
For the specific problem in (2) with /3 = 1, the optimal steady state level of K is
given by

pF'(K)

(9)

Pk
= Pk-

The intuition behind this condition is clear: if we happen to be at some level K 0
and contemplate staying there forever, then the present value of future returns
will be
V(Ko)

fo [pF(KO)
PkOl e -

8'

dt

pF(Ko) -PkrKO

(10)

However, a small change (say AK units) away from this level to a new sustained
level Ko + AK would change these profits by
APV(K) AK pF'(Ko) PAK
(11)
AK
6
The costs of making this change would be PkAK and hence it pays to make
marginal adjustments as long as the gain (loss) in (11) exceeds the cost (benefit
from liquidating and selling) of PkAK. At the optimal K= K*, (11) should be
equal to PkAK and hence condition (9) follows.
2 Second-order conditions must be met, of course. If more than one local maximum exists, the
solutions must be compared globally, in which case the initial value K 0 may be important.

J.E. Wilen

66

It should be obvious now that there is a relationship between adjustment costs
and the MRAP problem. In particular, if C(I) exhibits adjustment costs so that
, > 1 in (3), then the augmented integrand will no longer be linear in K since
C(I) will be convex. Thus adjustment costs lead to a more complicated problem
where simple impulse controls to a steady state are not the optimal solution. As it
turns out, however, the above hueristic of examining the marginal gains and losses
associated with moving from a presumed optimal steady-state stock is still valid.
In particular, as long as the relevant parameters p, Pk and r are autonomous or
invariant with time, the optimal solution involves approaching some steady-state
stock level K*. The approach, of course, cannot be MRAP since there are
adjustment costs.
Consider, for this more general problem, a situation where we begin with some
stock level K 0 and we are considering staying at K. Then, since we are
committed to this steady state level forever, Io = rKO and
PV(K) =f

e-

[pF(Ko)- C(Io=rKo)]dt =

(Ko) (rK)

(12)

The characteristic of K * which makes it the optimal steady-state level is that an
incremental increase or decrease to some new level K * + AK must result in no
gains as before. Suppose that we consider a slight increase AK> 0 from Ko, i.e.
we add AK units of capital and move to a new steady state K = KO + AK. Then
the change in the present value of sustained profits will be
APV(KO) AK
AK

pF'(K) - C'(rK)rK
8

(13)

The increase is achieved by purchasing some capital, however, so that we also
have a short term acquisition cost of
C()
AI

AI

C'(Io)AI.

(14)

If we happened to be to the left of the maximum of (12) initially, the acquisition
would yield a positive contribution (13) offset by a negative cost (14). As long as
the net gain is positive it pays to make the incremental acquisition. Similar
reasoning would hold for corresponding marginal liquidations of the capital
stock. 3 Thus, K * can be identified as that level for which a further incremental
move results in no net gain or where an equal gain (loss) in sustained profits is
just matched by the cost (gain) in investment (disinvestment) need to obtain that
3 In this case, it is convenient to assume symmetric adjustment costs so that the marginal cost of
adding a unit from the steady-state position is C'(rKO) and the marginal cost of removing a unit is

- C'(rKo).

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

67

move, i.e.
pF'(K*) C(rK*)r - C'(I*)= C'(rK*).

(15)

The intuition behind this condition is the same as discussed for the linear case in
that at the long-run optimal steady-state stock, the present value of the benefits of
a marginal change in the steady-state capital stock are just offset by the (current)
marginal cost of making that change.
These results can be expressed graphically as follows. Consider the cost
function in (3) above with /3 = 2 and
= 1, i.e. alternatively the case with
adjustment costs and without them. Figures 2.1(a) and 2.1(b) show the steady-state
profits per time period for any given long-run K. In the steady state, investment
(I= rK) must be just enough to cover depreciation and hence C(I) can be
expressed in terms of the stock level or C(rK). The added costs associated with
adjustment costs over and above the constant unit investment costs PkrK imply
that steady-state profits will be maximum at a lower stock level with = 2
compared with = 1. Figure 2.1(c) graphs conditions (9) and (15) above. The
optimal steady-state value of K= K * just balances the marginal gains and losses
associated with an incremental change in the long-run steady-state stock level.
Note that K* is not where per period sustained profits are largest generally
(except when 8 = 0). This is because if one happens to be at this point initially, it
pays to give up a little of these long run profits in trade for some "liquidation"
gains. In fact, the larger the discount rate the more it pays since future losses in
steady-state profits become discounted relative to immediate liquidation gains. In
contrast, if one starts with a low stock, it pays to invest in stock to increase
long-run sustained profits up until K* is reached. As incremental changes are
added in this case, (13) and (14) are both positive but the difference or overall
gain is positive until K = K *. Here, again, with a positive discount rate it does
not pay to invest up to the point where steady-state profits are maximum since
immediate take-home profits must be forgone to do so. The higher the discount
rate, the lower are the prospective gains and the more onerous are the present
costs.
What role do adjustment costs play in this problem? Generally adjustment
costs affect both the steady-state value K * and the optimal approach to K * for
any arbitrary KO. The affect on K* can be seen in Figures 2.1(a)-2.1(c). In
particular, if /3 = 1, K=1 is the optimal long-run steady-state stock. In this case,
however, as discussed before, the optimal approach to K* is simply an impulse
control which immediately jumps K to K* with I= oo (if K0O<K*) or
I = - oc (if K > K *). In the more interesting case, as adjustment costs increase,
K * decreases because the per period costs of maintaining the stock (i.e. replacing
depreciation) are higher.

68

J.E. Wilen

1
IoD
an 13=2 6

rn Jp-=l

Figure 2.1. Optimal steady-state stock levels - with and without adjustment costs.

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

69

The remainder of the optimization problem involves determining how to get to
K * from some arbitrary K 0 . The problem of determining the explicit optimal
approach is more technically difficult but basically boils down to the condition
that K,* satisfy
C'(It*) =

pF'(K)e -( 8+r)(s- ')ds.

(16)

The expression is basically a non-steady-state version of (15), where It and K t
now represent optimal (non-steady-state) values. 4 Eq. (16) is an equation for the
optimal path of It* and k + rK as well and if differentiated with respect to time,
the result will be a (nonlinear generally) second-order differential equation in K
whose solution depends upon the end point conditions and the time horizon.5
For a well-behaved problem (i.e. with F concave, parameters time invariant,
and C convex) with an infinite time horizon, the solution to the differential
equation in (16) is qualitatively a smooth asymptotic [see Figure 2.2(a)] approach
to the steady-state value of K *. If a terminal value KT is to be reached in a finite
problem, the solution involves staying "close" to K * for a time dependent on the
horizon length [see Figure 2.2(b)].6 If K > K *, the optimal path is corresponding
4 This condition is derived as follows. The current valued Hamiltonian for this problem may be
written as:
(a) H=pF(K)-C(I)+X[-rK+I].
The optimal investment level I* satisfies:
(b) C'(I,*)=X,,
(c) X, - 8X,= -pF'(K,)+Xr, and
(d) K= ,* - rK,.
Integrating (c) directly and evaluating between t and o gives
X( t ) =f,

pF( K )e

r)

)ds,

which when set equal to (b) gives eq. (16) in the text. Note that the assumption of proportional
depreciation allows the depreciation costs to be effectively collapsed into a discount factor so that at
each point along the optimal trajectory, the marginal cost of adding another unit of investment is just
balanced by the future gross marginal benefits, discounted by the augmented discount factor.
s To see this, note that differentiating (16) with respect to t gives
C"(l) i=(r +

)C'(l)-p

F'(K).

Since I = K + 8K, this equation in , I, and K can be re-expressed in terms of K, k, and K. With
both F'(K) and C'(-) nonlinear, the resulting equation will be a nonlinear second-order differential
equation, the solution of which is the optimal time path K,*.
6 This result is the so-called "turnpike" property of the optimal capital accumulation literature, i.e.
the optimal savings or investment rate calls for getting the capital stock level close to, and thereby
remaining close to, the "turnpike" level [characterized by (15)] and veering off only if an alternate
terminal stock must be reached. This makes intuitive sense if it is recalled that K* is defined as that
level for which incremental changes only decrease the present value of corresponding future returns.
The rapidity with which one approaches (K*) and subsequently stays there will, of course, be
governed precisely by the onerousness of costs of adjustment. When adjustment costs are zero, it pays
to get to K* as quickly as possible and stay as long as possible. As adjustment costs become positive,
one cannot afford to get too close or stay too long, and hence an asymptotic path arises.

70

J.E. Wilen
(za)
K*=1
K*=2

-

-

---

--------------------I~~H

Ko
t

K"fi

K'0

T

I=rK *

Figure 2.2. Optimal capital accumulation profiles- with and without adjustment costs.

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

71

N

K
N1=
1-(1-K) e-rt
No
Figure 2.3. Logistic growth model.

asymptotically decreasing. Finally, for a special case of adjustment costs where
the investment rate is simply constrained between upper and lower bounds
I < I, < I, adjustment costs are effectively zero within the range and infinite
otherwise, giving rise to the so-called bang-bang solution where investment levels
are I or I until Kit= 1 is reached. 7 This is illustrated in Figure 2.2(c).

2.3. Optimal use of naturalresources- the logistic model
The above introduction to capital theory focusing on a model of the firm provides
a useful framework for examining optimal natural resource use since, as discussed
earlier, it is convenient to view natural resources essentially as capital goods.
Perhaps the most commonly used model of biological populations is the
Pearl - Verhulst logistic model [Pearl (1930), Verhulst (1838)] in which the population is assumed to grow as a logistic or S-curve over time (see Figure 2.3). In this
model, the numbers or biomass of organisms grows rapidly early as the abundance of food is relatively great and then the growth rate tapers off and the
population asymptotically approaches its carrying capacity K. The equation
7 This is the model extensively developed by Clark (1976).

72

J.E. Wilen

describing the above growth pattern is
N(t)=

/

il_

_K

K
(

.

(17)

) -rt

This can be differentiated with respect to t and rearranged to get
= rN [1 - (N/K)] = F(N).

(18)

This form reveals the interplay between the model's two parameters, r and K. r
can be defined as the maximum intrinsic per capita growth rate of the population,
i.e. lim, o[N/N]. As N -- K, the effective per capita increase r[l - (N/K)I
declines linearly towards zero.
The logistic model is actually a flexible model which can represent a variety of
growth phenomenon in nature-ranging from the length or mass of a single
animal or group to the numbers or biomass of a whole population. We shall use it
to introduce two fundamental natural resources using situations - a timing problem and an optimal harvest problem.
Consider first a problem of timing where there are basically no constraints or
adjustment costs associated with reducing a given resource. For example, we
might have a situation where range animals are placed on a pasture and their total
weight gain follows the logistic in (17). If we are deciding when to remove and sell
them, we have the problem:
maxPV(t) = e-"V(t) = e-tP(t)N(t),

(19)

where P(t) is the price per unit biomass at time t. The solution to this problem is
found by differentiating (19) t, and setting the result equal to zero. Thus the
solution given by
'(t* = SV(t*),

(20)

where V(t) represents the value at t. The intuition behind this result is that we
wait until the increase in value of our capital left "on the hoof" [(t*)] is just
equal to the opportunity cost forgone by not removing from the pasture; i.e. the
amount we could get by selling and receiving V(t) and reaping a net gain in
the bank of V(t) over the same period. If value is growing as in Figure 2.4, the
optimal time to harvest is that associated with the highest iso-present value curve
PV.8 Before t*, it pays to leave one's capital in the natural bank since it is
growing in value faster than it would in the commercial bank. Thus, this result is
a general one which actually applies to any asset aging problem, whether it be
wine kept in storage, paintings or antiques held for value increases, etc.
8 Each of these curves is from the family of iso-present value curves derived by exponentiating some
amount PV into a future value V, i.e. V,= PVe8'. Alternatively, each curve converts some future
value V,into a corresponding present value PV = V,e- ' read off the vertical axis.

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

73
.. _..i

V

V(t) = p(t) N(t)

Figure 2.4. Optimal timing problem.

One additional point of interest in this problem is the relationship between
costs and prices. If we let C be some fixed costs incurred at harvest time, (20)
reduces to

R

N](P

) *(21)

Figure 2.5 plots the "own biological rate of interest" of the species N/N against
the term in brackets in (21). Note first that if the value per unit biomass is
increasing with age (e.g. a larger tree can be cut into more valuable products) then
P/P> 0 and it will pay to wait longer. Note also that unless the maximum
intrinsic growth rate r is greater than the discount rate 8, it will not even pay to
start the growth process since one can only lose even more money by waiting past
t = 0 as r(N) declines. Third, if prices are unchanging (P = 0) and there are no
harvesting costs, the optimal timing date is where IN/N= 8, or where the
biological rate of interest just falls to the opportunity cost rate of interest. In this
case, interestingly, the price level has no impact on the timing date since it
impacts both sides of (20) in the same way. Finally, again with P = 0, the optimal
timing date is directly related to the cost/price ratio and as C/P gets larger, the
optimal date gets later.

J.E. Wilen

74

[1-

]

tI

Figure 2.5. Optimal timing problem with costs.

The logistic model is more commonly used to depict populations subject to
continuous rather than one-shot harvesting. Let N(t) represent the numbers of
organisms in some natural population which grows to a natural equilibrium size
(without harvest) of K organisms. By plotting (18) we have the population yield
curve in Figure 2.6 which shows the number of organisms or biomass added each
period for various levels of N. Thus, if N=N0, the population is below its
carrying capacity K and will be producing net surpluses of births over deaths in
order to reach K. By choosing an instantaneous harvest rate h, man may cause
the stock to decrease, remain at N, or increase depending upon whether

75

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

No

K

N

Figure 2.6. Logistic growth model yield curve.

h > F(N o ), respectively. It is thus interesting to determine what pattern of harvest
rates over time would cause the stock to change in such a way as to maximize the
value of the services it provides. The economic problem facing the owner or
manager of such as stock would be: 9
maxf
sA.

e-"t'[ph-C(N,h)] dt
(22)

N = F(N)-h.
This is different from the timing problem in that a whole profile of harvest rates is
to be determined. Note the similarity with the model of the firm presented earlier.
Basically in both cases the flow of profits per time period depends upon the stock
level and the control variable (or investment/disinvestment rates I or h). In the
firm model, r = (K, I), where r was concave in K, reflecting concave production as a function of K and convex in I reflecting adjustment costs. In the above
model 7 = r(N, h) and for an interesting capital adjustment problem we need to
specify r as convex in h. This would be the case, for example, if congestion on
fishing grounds increased the unit cost of harvesting as h rose. A cost function
9 Note that this information implicitly assumes that the only values provided by the stock are those
obtained by harvesting. Also, by writing the exploited yield curve as an additive function, we are
disallowing feedback between the harvest rate and the species biology.

76

J.E. Wilen

N

N

Figure 2.7. Optimal steady-state stock level- harvesting model with adjustment costs.

77

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

which reflects congestion and unit costs which decrease as the stock density
increases would be
C(N, h)=

(h

) 2.

(23)

The solution to the above problem can be intuitively determined as before in
the investment model of the firm. In particular, there exists an optimal steady
state N * which just balances the present value of a marginal change in sustained
rents against the marginal "liquidation" value of reducing the stock further, or
t

[P( N)- C(N, F(N)] =h

p

2h-

=F(N)

(24)

With the cost function given in (23), the steady-state N* solution is as shown in
Figure 2.7. The approach is also asymptotic with h * - F(N*) as discussed
earlier. If the cost function did not incorporate adjustment costs (i.e. if it were
linear in h), the optimal harvest pattern would be a bang-bang control with an
initial impulse control if No> N* or h* = O if N o <N* and h = F(N*) thereafter. In the special case where 0 < h < h < oc, h* will again be an extreme value
control until N* is reached and h* = F(N*) thereafter.
To summarize, this section introduces some fundamental ideas from economic
theory that are essential to analyzing optimal use of renewable resources. After
pointing out the similarities between economic capital and natural capital, we
discuss some fundamental results from capital theory. A distinction is made
between timing problems and capital stock adjustment problems and emphasis is
placed on the role of adjustment costs in the character of the solution. Finally, to
apply the capital theory concepts in an introductory fashion to bioeconomic
problems, we use the logistic model in a first look at timing and capital stock
adjustment problems. In the next section, we begin to explore more fully
underlying mechanisms in nature which give rise to different population processes.
The focus of this next section is on the system as a whole, over the evolutionary
time frame, with special attention to the way evolutionary forces mold individual
natality and mortality characteristics which then impact population processes.

3. Biological mechanisms in natural populations
3.1. r- and K-selection
One of the most important factors guiding evolution of different organisms is
stability of the habitat. Semi-arid lands are characteristically unstable habitats,
temperate climates more stable, and tropical climates the most stable where
"stability" roughly refers to the temporal predictability of nutrient sources.

78

J E. Wilen

Within each climatic belt, food supplies vary considerably on a finer spatial scale
with variability increasing as the size of the patch decreases. Thus, a given space
in a forest (relatively stable overall) may contain patches with decomposing fruits,
dung, temporary water sinks, etc.- each its own micro environment offering
nutrient sources in various degrees of stability over time. Natural selection has
produced a spectrum of organisms presumably best adapted to the spatial and
intertemporal habitat variabilities in such a way that efficiently uses nutrients and
space. [Southwood (1981)].
When one examines the variety of bacteria, insects, plants, mammals, fish, and
birds appearing in natural systems, one of the first regularities which appears is
the correlation between size and habitat variability. Relatively smaller organisms
generally inhabit areas with higher variability, whereas larger organisms occupy
more stable environments. The evolutionary causality is not direct, however, since
larger animals can range over larger areas and hence create more stability merely
through increasing habitat space [May (1978)]. In fact, evolution has produced a
variety of organisms [MacArthur and Wilson (1967)] seemingly designed to make
the best use of resources whose temporal and spatial appearance varies greatly. At
one end of the spectrum are the so-called K-selected organisms. These organisms
must compete with many other organisms in environments with little variation
and hence they evolve to be efficient in using resources without overshooting
carrying capacity. For these species, "mistakes" created by losing competitive
edge to other competitors or by overharvesting have serious evolutionary consequences. Thus, regulatory mechanisms are built into these animals to return to
carrying capacity quickly and precisely when perturbations do occur. Generally
speaking, K-selected organisms are large in their species (reindeer, elephants,
condors) with long generation times, the significance of which will be discussed
shortly.
At the other end of the spectrum are r-selected organisms designed to quickly
exploit food supplies as they become available in (generally smaller) uncertain
environments. These organisms are usually at the small end of the size spectrum
and are foragers and opportunists. The r-selected organisms move from one space
to another as food supplies are found and utilized. Since there are no substantial
evolutionary penalties for overshooting a given area's carrying capacity, they tend
to have high reproductive rates and shorter generation times.
How do the basic characteristics of organisms differ among r- and K-selected
species? Basically, metabolism, size, generation time, fecundity, mortality, and
foraging and competitive behavior are different. Smaller organisms have a higher
surface to volume ratio and hence require higher metabolism simply to maintain
stasis with their environment. In addition, relatively smaller organisms tend to
have high fecundity (hence, large gonad/body weight ratios), reproduce quickly,
and undertake high energy foraging activities, and thus their "deterioration rates"
are correspondingly high. Lastly, because these organisms have been designed as

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

79

Sequoia

Fir
Whole
Kelpe
·
*Birch
I
a Balsam
Dog - wood

IOOm

Rhino

I Elk·
· Bear
Deer ·eSnake

Im

Fox

Man

· Beaver

Rat
Salamander
Crab
· Horseshoe crab
Lemm ngq
b
Mouse·Starfshn
eTurtle

10 cm

Scallop
Snail
Bee·
o

Elephant

Newt
Chameleon

I Oyster
Horse fly

Icm

House fly

Clam

Drosophla
Imm

Daphniao

Stentor

Paramecium

100 iL

· D dinum

Tetrohymena
*

Eug/eno
* Sprochreta

JO0/
10y
E. co/,
· * Pseudomonos
8. aureus
I hour

I day

I week

I month

i year

O0years

100 years

Generaton time
Figure 2.8. Relationship between size and generation time. [From John Tyler Bonner, Size and Cycle:

An Essay on the Structure of Biology (

1965 Princeton University Press), Fig. I, p. 17. Reprinted by

permission of Princeton University Press.]

exploiters of periodic nutrients, their lifespans have evolved to be relatively brief
to fit the intertemporal variation in a manner that reduces energy losses associated with foraging ranges and/or storage. All of these characteristics go hand in
hand to produce an observable pattern in nature, whereby length (size) is
positively related to generation time . Figure 2.8 shows the fit with some
organisms. Note that larger organisms are those commonly labeled K-selected
and the smaller organisms r-selected. In addition, there are several organisms
around the one year generation period. Natural selection has favored these over
longer-lived organisms, probably because some natural food supplies vary over
one year meteorological cycles and animals whose lifespan is in synchronization
do not need as much storage as a species to overwinter [Bonner (1965)].

80

J. E. Wilen

3.2. Characteristicsof organisms and growth processes
The interactions between fecundity, mortality, and generation time are best
discussed by developing a population model. The simplest point of departure for
considering population processes is to begin at the level of the individual
organism. Consider first, the numbers of such organisms and growth of such
numbers over time. Let N(O) be the initial number of reproductivity-capable units
at some time zero (it is often convenient to look simply at females). Suppose that
the animals have a lifespan or generation time of exactly years (or any other
unit of time)." ° Let R represent the net lifetime replacement ratio or the number
of animals that survive to become reproducers in the next generation, per unit of
parent stock. Then population size (or descendants of the N(O)) will number
N(kT) = N(O)Rk.

(25)

Here, k is an integer indexing the number of generations evolving past the first
generation. Note that R is a growth factor similar to the growth factor we might
apply to a bank deposit receiving interest-in this case the population "compounds" every
years and we measure its size at points in time in integers
multiples of so that t = kT, where k = 1, 2,....
In the above model, population size is measured by numbers of animals at
discrete points in calendar time and the critical parameter which determines
whether the population grows, stays constant, or declines is obviously R, the net
lifetime reproductive ratio. We may alternatively express R as a continuous
growth rate r by defining
r=

InR

(26)

By taking natural logarithms of (25) and using (26) we then have
N(kr) = N(O)exp[rkT]

(27)

as a model whose critical parameter is an instantaneous growth rate r.
In this simple model, the population will grow, remain constant, or decline
depending upon whether r 0, respectively, or alternatively on whether R > 1,
respectively. The product of r and also has an important interpretation that will
be explored more fully later. For now, however, it is sufficient to define a system's
"characteristic return time" t as the time it takes for a system to return to
equilibrium following a disturbance. For the logistic model previously examined
this characteristic return time t is approximately proportional to 1/r. Thus, if we
m In the simplest cases, the organism lasts one season and is replaced by some average R offspring.
Then season length or lifespan corresponds with generation time. Generally, when organisms overlap
in time, the concept of generation time is not so clear cut. One definition is the time that it takes a
stable population to increase by the factor R but other definitions are related to the average age of
females at reproductive age.

81

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

define
(28)

t = l/r,
we can express the parameters above as
1 lnR
r
=
=.

(29)

This suggests that species with higher lifetime reproduction ratios (R >> 1) may be
characterized as having low characteristic return times relative to their generation
time . As will be discussed later, this has important consequences for the
stability of such populations over time [May (1973a)]. Figure 2.9 shows relationships between r, R, and T for a variety of organisms.

0

0
P
C
0

0
Co
o
C

2
C

L

t

r

Generation time

(days)

Figure 2.9. Relationships between r,

and R.

82

J.E. Wiien

It is obvious that a model such as (27) is an inadequate description of most
populations in nature, since most do not explode without limit or crash to
extinction as is predicted with values of r greater than or less than zero,
respectively. More generally, as the numbers of organisms begin to impinge on
their fixed capacity environment, changes in reproductive and mortality rates (R
in the above model) and the generation time
adjust to dampen exponential
population growth. Correspondingly, for a declining population, nature has
provided stabilizers that work in the direction of increasing r. These mechanisms
operate differently depending upon whether the species is r- or K-selected.
Stabilizing mechanisms imply density dependent growth of the population, for
which a variety of models have been proposed. The characteristics of these models
depend upon the strength of the density dependence but a fascinating spectrum
exists even for relatively simple forms. In general terms, density dependence
implies a relationship between numbers in successive generations such that
N, = F(N,),
(30)
where t indexes the generation and F is some nonlinear function. Table 2.1 [May
and Oster (1976)] lists some of the forms which have been proposed, each of
which depicts numbers growing at levels below some equilibrium defined by the
fixed point
N* = F(N*)
(31)
and declining for levels above N*. These models are often referred to as lumped
parameter models because the size and age-specific information pertinent to the
population are collapsed into a single variable N, which may represent numbers,
biomass, etc.
The above models are all nonlinear first-order difference equation descriptions
of numbers of organisms. The simplest form, and one whose structure lends itself
to ready intuitive interpretation is form 1, or
N(t + T) = N(t)exp[r(1- N(t)/K)i ].
(32)

Table 2.1
Specific equations for F(N)
N exp[r(1 - (N/K))]
N[1 + r(l - N/K)]
XN/(1 +aN) b
XN/[1 + exp(-A(1 - N/B))]
AN/[1 + (N/B)b]

XN l

}

as N > K
N[1/[(a +bN) - oal]]

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

83

In this model K is a measure of the carrying capacity of the environment and r is
the maximum intrinsic rate of growth of the population. For values of N, = 0 the
population increases by some rate close to r and for N K the growth rate
approaches zero, i.e. the system converges to a steady population size N * = K.
This model is useful because it is capable of expressing the implications of a
range of natural selection from r-strategists to K-strategists - referring to the two
parameters of the model. As suggested above, the growth parameter and its
behavior over a range of population values is critical in determining an organism's
adaptability to its environment. In this model we can re-express the r in terms of
the lifetime reproduction ratio and to get
r(N)= lnRK

N)

(33)

r-selected species have evolved to fill empty ecological niches rapidly and hence
have high r's over a wide range of population levels. Thus, evolutionary pressures
will tend to make R large and small. R can be large by having high fecundity
and high immigration rates and/or low mortality and emigration rates. Generally
r-strategists have high fecundity levels and spend more energy on foraging and
filling spaces than tending young - leading to a gross reproductive ratio R that is
high and a gross survival ratio RD that is low, with the product R= RBRD
relatively large [Southwood et al. (1974)]. In addition,
is small as discussed
before, implying In R/T is relatively large.
K-selected organisms, on the other hand, evolve to be large to increase their
interspecific competition. Thus, is relatively large and other things equal r(N)
smaller than r-selected species. Since their strategy is one of best adapting to a
stable environment, they evolve so that fecundity and mortality are relatively low,
with a significant investment in protecting young rather than high RB values
[Pianka (1970), Southwood et al. (1974)]. Thus, with RB low and RD high, In R
will be relatively low, and combined with a high T, making r(N) low. With r(N)
low, however, perturbations will require a long recovery time t, and hence these
organisms typically have mechanisms which increase RB when the population is
below K (e.g. larger numbers of offspring at birth) or decrease
(earlier age to
maturity) to compensate. Similarly, when the population N nears K, strategies to
stabilize so that R _ 1 have evolved, such as territorial behavior and other mating
behavior which excludes potential breeders. Thus, K-strategists are designed to
stabilize near K, calling for a low r generally. If perturbed globally away from K,
the mechanisms that have evolved to handle local perturbations may not be
strong enough and the species may be outcompeted for its former space. Typically, these animals require minimum densities to find mates and reproduce
(unlike r-strategists, like insects which emit powerful pheromones to attract at low

84

J. E. Wilen

densities) and hence may decline if perturbed below this critical level.
In between the extreme r- and K-strategists are a host of species which mix
features of both. For example, certain ungulates such as caribou and deer seem
adapted to swings in available vegetation longer than the yearly cycle. They have
higher values of r to allow them to quickly respond to episodic periods of high
browse availability, but they are kept in check via predators. Thus, when nutrient
supply is at average levels, predators cause high mortality on older and nutritionally weaker animals but in good years the population "irrupts" and over-runs
predators to take advantage of sudden nutrient supply increases. Thus, the
intrinsic growth parameters of these species may fall between the exploiters and
the K-selected species but the effective growth rate after predation keeps them at
equilibrium - or at least in regular cycles.

3.3. Dynamic behavior of populations
What are the implications of these differences in basic characteristics [which we
have summarized in the single parameter r(N)] for population growth patterns
over time? This question can be partially answered by considering the above
model reduced to a single parameter model in r. Let Pt = N(t)/K and measure
time in units of the generation length (i.e. = 1) so that (32) becomes:

P,+1 = Pexp[r(1 - P,)]

-

F(P,; r).

(34)

By plotting the graph of F as in Figure 2.10, we can trace the course of the
population ever successive generations as shown. As can be seen, the intersections
of F with the 45 ° line yields the systems fixed points (equilibria values). More
importantly, the slope of F at P* determines the nature of the dynamical
behavior, i.e. whether or not and how fast the system converges to P *. As can be
seen, the system is locally stable near P* if the slope's absolute value is less than
1. For values equal to one, the equilibrium N is neutrally stable and P will
oscillate in regular cycles around P whereas if the slope is greater than one in
absolute value, the system diverges.
Such different behavior depending upon the slope raises questions about its
relationship to r and hence implications for r- and K-selected populations. The
first question is easily answered, since for this particular model the slope at P*
equals 1- r. As we discussed previously, evolution has created r-selected
organisms in such a way that r is relatively large (greater than one, say) whereas
K-selected organisms have relatively small values of r. If r is on the order of
0.05 - 0.015 as it is for whales, for example, then the slope will be positive and
perturbations away from K will be followed by an asymptotic approach as the
diagram shows. Even if r(N) increases in response to lower densities as it

85

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

Pt

1
r<1

I
I

/

1 <r<2

r=2

r>2

Figure 2.10. Stability and the intrinsic growth rate r.

typically does in K-selected organisms, the response will be a globally smooth
asymptotic approach as long as r(N) is less than one (making the slope still
positive). As r becomes larger, corresponding to r-selected species, the slope
becomes negative (as r > 1) and the return after a perturbation becomes cyclic
with an overshoot followed by an undershoot, etc. As long as the slope is not too
steep, (i.e. 1 - r < -1 or r < 2), the oscillations converge.

86

J.E. Wilen

To understand the intuitive meaning behind this behavior, return to our
definition
r=--

or

r = /t

=

In R.

(35)

In the above system we have defined time units to be generation lengths so that
T = 1. Note that as we move from K-selected organisms, the lifetime replacement
ratio R moves from values close to one to larger values. In the lower range,
1 < R < e, In R will lie between zero and one and (since = 1) r will be less than
one, resulting in no overshoot behavior. As e < R < e 2, In R lies between one and
two and there will be an overshoot, but it will be convergent. Interestingly, the
bifurcation point between asymptotic and oscillating behavior (r= 1) has an
interpretation relating to the ratio of generation time to recovery time t. Since
T = 1 and r = 1/tc, the break point r = 1 is actually where the ratio of generation
time to recovery time is one. As r > 1, the system is one for which the generation
time exceeds the recovery time and oscillations begin. But the generation time is
really a lag time in this system in that effects in one period are felt by the next
generation
periods later. It is well known in engineering control systems that
stable control results as long as the response time is close to the lag time of the
signal. In these models, the signal is transmitted with a one generation (-period)
lag and as response time begins to get smaller (i.e. response is faster) relative to
this, the system tends to overshoot the signal. For very fast response time, some
interesting and counterintuitive behavior begins to occur in fact.
As just discussed, for the above model, the slope at P * equals 1 - r and, hence,
the system is locally stable as long as 0 < r < 2. As r increases past 2, however,
the original equilibrium point becomes a repelling point and some suprising
behavior begins to emerge [May and Oster (1976), May (1974a, 1976, 1977)].
Specifically, as r increases through 2, the possible equilibrium values of P* move
past a single value to two locally stable values which spread symmetrically away
from P* = 1 as r increases up to another bifurcation point. This implies that for
each value of r greater than 2 and less than the next bifurcation value, the system
is characterized by a two-period cycle whereby the population returns to each of
the two equilibrium points every two periods. As r reaches its next bifurcation
point (the exact value determined by the specific model), the two previous stable
equilibria became unstable (as did the first as r - 2, the first bifurcation point)
and bifurcate into four fixed points implying four-period cycles, and so on. In
general, as r increases, a hierarchy of cycling models arises, with periods
1, 2, 4, 8,16,..., etc. As r continues to increase, the window within which each set
of 2n equilibrium points remains stable decreases, however, so that r approaches
some limiting value [Li and York (1975)]. The branching diagram in Figure 2.11
shows the hierarchy of fixed points associated with increasing values of r. For
example, if r = r as shown, the system will be characterized by fluctuations where

87

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use
P.

--------------------

Po
i
Po

I
I

----------------------I

I

i

Ad_______+_~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
I

________ _~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I
I
I
I
2.0

I
I
I
I I
ro 2.2

Stable equilibrium-asymptotic
Stable equilibrium-convergent oscillation
2 point cycle
4 point cycle
8 point cycle
16, 32, 64 etc.
Chaotic behavior

I
2.4

I
I
I I
rI 2.6

r

Il
Y

0 <r<
1 <r <
2.000 < r <
2.526 < r <
2.656 < r <
2.685 < r <
r>

1
2.000
2.526
2.656
2.685
2.692
2.692

Figure 2.11. Equilibria characteristics in a simple model.

P = PO every other period, and P = PO in intervening periods. If r = r the system
will return to each of four fixed points every four periods.
As r is increased beyond , the behavior becomes even more surprising as it
enters into the so-called "chaotic" region. For the model in (34), for example, if
r > 2.6924 there are an infinite number of cycles possible for each r, each one
different from the other and dependent upon initial conditions. Moreover, there
are an uncountable number of initial conditions for which resulting trajectories,
though bounded, exhibit aperiodic behavior, i.e. the pattern never repeats itself no
matter how long the time period simulated. Hence, surprisingly, even for a
relatively simple model, dynamic behavior can range over an incredible richness
of possibilities from asymptotic approaches to a single equilibrium, to cyclical
with regular periodicity, to chaotic behavior which, although produced from a

J.E. Wilen

88

predictable mechanical deterministic model, may appear to be completely random
and unpredictable.
The practical importance of such chaotic behavior is probably less than the
intellectual interest it provides. This is because even if there are species whose
r-values are high enough to imply chaotic oscillations, such behavior is not as
relevant as that at other nonequilibrium population ranges. Since these organisms
are opportunists, they are not really inhabiting an area with fixed carrying
capacity for long and hence do not typically run up against strongly overcompensating density effects close to equilibrium. Instead, r-selected organisms operate at lower densities and expand rapidly and then move on to new patches. Thus,
even though such odd behavior is predicted near the equilibrium value, it is a
consequence of the high r in a model which is most relevant in population ranges

Nt+l

election

r-selection

Nk

Nr
range of variability
(r-selected)

i-

Nt

N*
range of
variability
(K-selected)

Figure 2.12. r- and K-selected growth characteristics.

-t

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

89

which are removed from K. Figure 2.12 depicts differences between the two
strategies for relevant population ranges.
In summary, this section expands on the simple logistic model description of
populations by focusing on the two critical parameters, the intrinsic growth rate r
and the carrying capacity K. We have attempted to maintain a "big picture"
framework for discussion of individual organism characteristics by using a system
perspective which depicts a spectrum of organisms evolving in response to habitat
conditions. Thus, the r-K selection paradigm is the backdrop for explaining the
variety of fecundity, mortality, generation time, and behavioral patterns we
observe in nature. These individual organism characteristics are then used to
develop some simple population process models and discuss their dynamical
properties. It is shown that the intrinsic growth rate r is itself a parameter which
summarizes natality/mortality factors and, in conjunction with generation time, a
critical determinant of population stability.

4. Bioeconomics models of natural populations
4.1. Values derived from natural resources
In this section we tie together the introductory material in Sections 2 and 3 in a
review of models of optimal natural resource use. As might be imagined, when
one confronts the incredible variety of population processes in nature with the
range of values which man derives from them, the possible permutations of
optimal use models are large indeed.
The potential service flows from natural systems may be related to any of a
number of characteristics of a population from pure numbers of organisms, to
weight or biomass, to other age/size specific features. These service flows may
also be stock related, flow related, or population-distribution related. For example, for a population which provides values to photographers or bird or animal
watchers, the number of sightings may be important and hence generally related
to the stock level. Hence, other things equal, the optimal policies would be aimed
towards maintaining a large and viable population size by, for example, habitat
investments or access controls which minimize adverse impact of these nonconsumptive users (who might indirectly be consumptive users if their activities
adversely impacted habitats, etc.). Even this case is not totally straightforward,
however, because the value per encounter may increase more than proportionately
as the population is smaller and the number of encounters is reduced.
In a similar manner, man may derive values from a system in its "natural"
state and hence, again, optimal use would aim at trading off the capturing of these
values (by viewing or encounters) against the costs of such activities in terms of
perturbations away from "naturalness". Thus we often limit access to particular

90

J.E. Wilen

endangered species' (condor). Current controversies over whether it is best to
protect some species in controlled environments or leave them in natural systems
reflect some of these value conflicts.
It is also sometimes the case that services are derived from numbers of
organisms with particular characteristics. Examples are hunting for the more
highly colored males of a bird species or hunting for large-antlered trophy
animals. In these cases, optimal policies are geared towards selective harvesting
which alters the population distribution while (perhaps) maintaining some total
population size. The interactions between the distribution of characteristics and
the total population size may be complex as ongoing controversies over either-sex
deer hunting suggest.
In other cases more commonly examined, the value derived from natural
resources is related to consumptive use by harvesting. In these cases the critical
issues have to do with timing the harvest, determining how many to take, and
determining the characteristicsof those taken. In real populations, a population's
number and characteristics are interrelated in sometimes complex ways and hence
it is generally not enough to simply try and determine (for example) the optimal
stock level. Generally, as a population is reduced by exploitation, the characteristics and distribution of individual population members change. For example,
harvesting of whales has led to a decrease in age to maturity and an overall
increase in size of younger-aged animals. Similarly, harvesting some bird populations often causes more frequent breeding and larger clutch sizes. Thus, the age
and size distribution, at minimum, are usually altered by harvesting. These factors
will be discussed in the next subsection which discusses life histories of different
organisms. At this point, however, it is enough to recall the previous section on
r-K selection pressures which, in the end, determine generally how we should
expect a population to respond to exploitation.
A final factor which is critical to the structure of the appropriate model is the
mechanism or technology of harvesting. Harvesting technology not only determines the appropriate cost structure (e.g. whether adjustment costs are substantial or not), but it also dictates precisely how the underlying population
processes will be affected. In some situations it is virtually impossible to selectively harvest so that the age, sex, and size characteristics of the harvest are
proportional to their representations in the population as a whole. Examples
include trawl fishing or some long-line fisheries, some seine fisheries such as
herring or anchovy fisheries, etc. In other cases, it is possible to select into two
groups as, for example, minimum sizes for crab and salmon, prohibition against
taking "berried" lobsters (females with eggs), forked antler or better deer hunts,
mesh size restrictions in net fisheries, etc. At the end of the spectrum are the (rare)
cases where perfect selectivity is feasible, such as land based fur seal harvests,
some culling harvests of mammals, etc. The cost and purely physical characteristics of technology are not simply exogenous, of course, since it is sometimes
cheaper to nonselectively harvest than selectively harvest.

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

91

In summary, the use of natural populations confronts us with choice problems
of considerable complexity. It is especially important to keep in mind that the
biological and the economic (or valuation) systems are intricately interrelated. In
the short run with an unexploited stock, the existing population limits the number
and kinds (and hence value) of what can be taken. As the population is drawn
down, however, it is not only numbers taken but also the timing and the
characteristics of those removed that determining the future service flow from the
resource. In the long run, evolution may even be producing new organisms that
are better designed to fit into their new (exploited) environment.

4.2. Life histories of organisms
In most resource-using situations where harvesting is taking place, the focus of
management is on biomass rather than numbers alone. Thus, while it is often
intellectually convenient to focus on the population as a whole, it is important for
management purposes to understand how characteristics of individuals respond
to exploitation as well. The response of individuals depends on the genetic code
built into the organism, of course, and thus our discussion of r-K selection and
its manifestation in fecundity and mortality patterns is useful here.
As a broad generalization, large organisms such as vertebrates are K-selected
and small ones such as insects and bacteria are r-selected. This generalization is a
bit too broad to be discriminating, however, and within major taxa there are
generally both r- and K-selected examples. In what follows, we discuss general
characteristics which seem to fit many (but not all) organisms in the fish,
mammals and birds taxa.
4.2.1. Fish populations
The major stages of development of individual fish include the periods in which
the organism is spawn (eggs), larva, juvenile, or pre-reproductive, adult (reproduction), and old age. Generally speaking there are density dependent effects in each
of these life stages as well as external factors (predators, environmental perturbations, etc.) which impact survivorship and growth of the individual organisms in
the population. With respect to natality factors, it is usually the case that
fecundity and condition of the eggs are related to food supply available to the
parent population prior to spawning [Nikolskii (1960), Weatherly (1972)]. A
considerable amount of weight gain is associated with gonad production and
when environmental conditions are unfavorable and/or the parent population is
large relative to food supply, the amount and quality of spawn will be reduced
and hence overpopulation will be regulated against [Bagenel (1976)].
During spawn and larvae stage, a significant mortality occurs due to predation
and sensitivity to environmental changes. This stage is extremely important in

92

J.E. Wien

determining the size and age configuration of many fish populations since adverse
and favorable environmental conditions can impact relative numbers of survivors
so radically. It is not uncommon for adjacent year classes to vary from 10 to 90
fold, a circumstance obviously important to the problem of optimal harvesting
later in the life cycle.
As larvae become pre-reproductive juveniles, the mortality rate decreases as
their mobility and ability to evade predators increases [Beverton and Holt (1957)].
Throughout this period, length increases approximately linearly with age at a rate
dependent on food supply. Length gain tapers off near sexual maturity and
increases slowly after that.
The above characterization suggests that fish populations on the whole are
r-selected, i.e they have high fecundity, relatively low generation times, and
experience high pre-productive mortality. The above life stage characteristics of
fish also reveal something about how the population will respond to harvesting,
i.e. other things equal, as the stock is reduced by harvesting, the mechanisms that
are built in to increase an already high r will begin to operate. Beyond this simple
statement, however, there exists a wide variety of other things (that are "not
equal") which affect choice of the appropriate model. Some species, salmon for
example, have a precise and invariant generation time and they appear at
absolutely regular intervals to spawn and repeat the cycle. Others spawn almost
continuously and have populations of mixed and overlapping age classes. Some
species are small and short-lived (clearly r-selected) whereas others have long
generation times (e.g. sturgeon over 100 years) and are more clearly classified
K-selected. Another large group is in the middle of the spectrum, locked in a
sometimes delicately balanced web of predator-prey interactions. Thus, even
though as a group fish have r-selection characteristics, there is enough variety
among fish species to warrant a range of modeling efforts, some of which may be
based on r-selection, K-selection, or predator-prey assumptions.
4.2.2. Mammal populations
Mammals exhibit a lifetime growth pattern similar to fish in that individual
weight increases rapidly early and then tapers off near sexual maturity. Unlike
fish, seasonal weight variation around a mean may be substantial as browse, etc.
availability follows normal seasonal patterns. In addition, many mammals actually lose weight during old age. The availability of food supplies does not seem in
general to have as significant an impact on growth, and hence sexual maturity
occurs at a particular age rather than size. Fecundity in mammals is much lower
than for fish, on the order of one to ten per year as opposed to thousands for fish.
The relationship between food and fecundity varies across species, but improved
nutritional status of females often results in an increase in the number of young
per pregnancy, a decrease in time between pregnancies, or a decrease in age to
sexual maturity [Caughley (1976)].

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

93

Mortality among mammals follows the so-called "J-curve" relationship with
high mortality of young, low mortality of reproductive age adults, and high
mortality among old animals [Taber and Dasman (1958)]. The entire curve may
be affected by periodic changes in food supply due to environmental changes,
decreases in predators, etc. [see Caughley (1966) and Hutchison (1978)] curves for
mammals.
4.2.3. Bird populations
Birds are similar to mammals in fecundity schedules in that fecundity rises to
some relatively fixed level at sexual maturity and remains approximately constant.
The level may be dependent on food supplies for some birds, however [Lack
(1966)]. Abundant food supplies result in higher egg quality, an increase in clutch
size in some species, and sometimes a second brood in the same breeding season.
The growth rate of birds is similar also to mammals in that it follows an S-shaped
curve with some within-season variations as food supplies fluctuate seasonally.
There is some disagreement over whether a typical mortality profile exists but it is
generally believed that the mortality rate is high for chicks and fledglings and
then decreases to some constant or increasing pattern [Hutchison (1978)]. Mortality rates differ among territorial birds, with successful territory holders having
lower rates than those without territories [Watson (1979)]. In addition, mortality
is significant for many species during winter months, and thus protective habitat
availability and winter food supplies are critical determinants of some populations.
These life history characteristics are helpful in predicting how an exploited
population will differ from an unexploited population. Generally when the stock
level is reduced there will be r- and K-selection responses in the birth and
mortality rates due to reduced density dependence. These will manifest themselves differently between broad taxa and also between species within a major
taxa. Figure 2.13 compares the critical parameters for fish, mammals, and birds in
rough fashion. These form the basis for discussions of various models of exploited
populations which appear in the next section.

4.3. Nonoverlapping generations models
Some species of organisms occur in regular (e.g. Salmon, 7 and 14 year Cicadas)
or irregular (coniferous forests after a fire) cycles of same-aged cohorts. If these
do not mix with other cohorts (as subspecies of salmon often do at river mouths,
or as trees in a mixed forest often do) so that harvesting can be directly only at
the cohort in question, then a particularly simple form of nonoverlapping
generation model (NOGM) is appropriate.

J. E. Wilen

94
BIRDS

MAMMALS

FISH

V

weight

_

4

fecundity

j '7

rI

Li~
numbers
surviving
per adult

6

~~~~~~~~~~--~~~~~~~~~~2-~~~~~
------

AGE

-

Figure 2.13. Fecundity and natality among fish, birds, and mammals.

There are basically two variants of NOGM depending upon how these populations are connected in time. At one extreme are situations where there is no
intertemporal link so that the correct model is one that simply optimizes within
each generation time in question. At the other extreme are cases where subsequent
populations are affected by this period's "escapement" so that a multigenerational
model is needed.

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

95

4.3.1. Cases of no intragenerationalinterdependences
On first thought it seems unlikely that we might find situations in nature where
there is no connection between individuals in one generation and those in
another. This is logically true given the nature of the reproductive process. There
are still at least two classes of circumstances where ignoring intragenerational
links is appropriate however. The first is where migration and mobility of the
organisms are high. The second is where mortality in a particular pre-reproductive
phase in the life process is a critical determinant of ultimate population size. Both
of these characteristics are likely to arise in extreme r-selected species. The case of
highly mobile species is easy to see if we think of an insect pest (.g. cotton lygus)
which invades a farmer's field [Southwood (1975)]. From the individual farmer's
point of view, the decision of when to spray is not intragenerationally dynamic
since migration basically determines the initial bug population in his field. There
is an intergenerational dynamic problem, however, concerning optimal timing of
sprays for the cohort in question.
The case where pre-reproductive mortality is limiting is more common and
occurs for many small fish in particular. For these species, the reproductive (and
harvestable) population size in one generation has virtually no impact on the
subsequent generation's population size within a substantialrange. To understand
this mechanism, consider a case where the spawn of fish in one generation (Sk)
turns into larvae (Lk) which survive into "recruits" (Rk). Recruits then are either
harvested (Hk) or become parents (Pk) to the next generation so that we can
write:
Rk+l = F(Pk).

(36)

This is a general expression for the Beverton-Holt (1957) stock-recruitment
model which admits a variety of intragenerational mechanisms, the dynamics of
which were discussed earlier. Of specific interest are cases where intragenerational
impacts are negligible. To understand one of these cases, suppose that larval stage
fish withstand some density-dependent mortality so that
L/L = -m 1 -m

2

L,.

(37)

If we let S be the spawn surviving into the larval stage and R the recruits leaving
from the larval stage, we have L(O) = S and L(T)= R. Then (37) can be solved
over [0, T] to yield:
aS
R = l+bS'

wherea,b>0.

(38)

Note that lim s 0 (dR/dS) = a and lim a R = a/b, where the constants a and
b are related to ml and m2. The above form for the solution also holds if ml and
m2 are arbitrary nonnegative functions of time, in which case a' and b' are new
constants [related to ml(t) and m 2(t)] [Clark (1976)]. More interesting is the

96

J.E. Wilen

following [see Clark (1976)]: consider (37) with m 2 = mi > 0 for some interval
O< tL < t < t < T and zero elsewhere, i.e. where there is at least some density
dependent mortality for t - tL units of time in the larvae life stage interval
[0, T]. Then it can be shown that R = L(T) has an upper bound,

1--

R = L(T) <

m(t.-

(39)

tL)

which is independent of S = L(0). Thus, any arbitrary critical period in which
density dependent survival of organisms occurs may fix the ultimate upper limit
of recruitment. For species operating in a fluctuating environment, the conditions
in this critical period may be virtually the sole determinant of the corresponding
recruitment levels as discussed in the previous section. Thus, for species like
salmon which undergo high and variable juvenile mortality while in streams, a
policy such as encouraging aquaculture (nurturing during and releasing after the
critical period) may be the only significant way of increasing potential catch.
The importance of the above result is that it shows that a critical phase in the
pre-recruit stage of an organism's life history may be a far more important
determinant of the ultimate harvestable population than the basic intragenerational relationship between parent stock Pk-1 and spawn Sk. Thus, for some
species, it is really not worth saving a large part of recruitment to become parent
stock because the ultimate size of the next generation's recruitment will be almost
wholly determined by random environmental factors anyway. In these cases, it is
appropriate to optimize over each cycle separately.
The Beverton-Holt model also suggests another interesting special case where
it is appropriate to ignore intragenerational links and formulate the problem as a
one-generation optimization problem. This is the case where the fecundity of the
species is very high. Consider an initially unexploited population characterized by
the spawn/recruitment relationship in (38) and suppose that spawn depends
upon the previous generation's parent stock so that S = aP. Then, in equilibrium,
Rk+ 1 = Rk = R= k+l = Pk so that
aS k
Rk+l = Pk+1 = -1 +bSk

I

aaPk
aP
+ baPk

(40)

Note that the equilibrium value in terms of parameters is R = (aa - 1)/(ab).
Now suppose that the recruitment is reduced (for example by harvesting) to some
level so that the parent stock P = eR, where 0 < < 1. Then the corresponding
recruitment in the next generation will be:

~Rk+sa
-i [
k~lP=C

ab

aa

1

-

1 + e(aa-1)J R

=Pk l+e(aa -)
[ Eaa -]1

aaE

+ E(aa - 1

1

(41)

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

97

Rk+l1

Figure 2.14. Recruitment and fecundity.

It will always be the case that harvesting some of last year's equilibrium
recruitment will result in this year's recruitment being lower since the bracketed
term is less than one for any e, and as e gets very small (i.e. harvest is large) there
will be much less recruitment. Notice, however, that a can virtually swamp any
values of e if it is high enough, and, in fact, as a - oo, the term in brackets
approaches one. In words, this suggests that species with very high fecundity will
allow a wide range of harvesting without substantially affecting next year's
recruitment. The larger a is, the smaller e can be (i.e. the larger harvest can be
and still maintain next year's recruitment close to this year's). Figure 2.14 shows
some of these relationships.
For many species of fish and insects, and perhaps some birds and mammals,
either or both of the above mechanisms does seem to be operative and hence we
can assume for all intents and purposes that there is no intertemporal link
between generations within the relevent range of harvesting. Thus, the problem of

J.E. Wilen

98

determining how many to harvest is unimportant and more important questions
have to do with when to harvest. With insect populations, for example, there may
be critical periods in their life-stages where controls are most effective. In fact, as
shown in (41) above, spraying or otherwise enhancing density dependence in this
critical window may be the best way to impact the ultimate population size and
hence minimize potential damage, other things equal.
4.3.2. Beverton-Holt single-cohort model
For fish or mammals, the issue of when to harvest is often where biomass has
reached some critical level. The optimal timing thus depends upon interrelationships between age, length, and weight. With fish and, in fact, most species, it has
been noted empirically that length, weight, and age of individual organisms tend
to follow a relatively predictable pattern. For length, for example, a widely used
model is the von Bertalanffy equation where length (t) grows at a rate depending
upon the difference between some maximum length lox and the current length, i.e.
i(t) = K [loo - 1(t)]

(42)

This differential equation has the solution

(43)

1(t) = loo(1 - e-K(t-to)).

Weight over the lifetime is generally related to structural characteristics of the
organisms and may follow the single allometric relationship:

W = al b.

(44)

Weight has been found empirically to be correlated with the cube of length in a
wide variety of organisms so that (44) with b = 3 and (43) are often combined to
yield a von Bertalanffy weight equation:
W(t) = Woo( - e k(t'-'))

3

.

(45)

In this relationship the inflection point is approximately at the weight level which
is one-third of Woo.
The von Bertalanffy weight equation may be combined with a Beverton-Holt
stock recruitment model to yield a single-cohort model of fishery biomass.
Consider, for example, a case where a relationship like (36) with m 2 = 0 describes
numbers during the harvestable recruit stage. This suggests that fish in the recruit
stage simply die at a constant density independent rate M. Note that we still may
assume a density dependent mortality process in the larvae or spawning prerecruit
stages so that intragenerational effects can be ignored. Assume that fishing at
different intensity levels adds another form of mortality F, so that:
1 = - N(M +-F(t)),

N(O) =No.

(46)

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

99

The economic problem is one of determining how to maximize the present
value of the yield (biomass) from this cohort over its generation length assuming
that the population mortality follows (45) and individual weight gain follows (45).
The structure of this problem is general enough to admit several different
harvesting possibilities. For example, if the fishery is a hook-and-line fishery, then
one must decide a season opening date and level of fishing effort which maximize
the present value of the biomass yield. If the fishery is a net fishery, the optimal
season opening date has a direct counterpart in the optimal minimum mesh size,
since fish girth will correspond in a particular way via the weight equation to age
(season date) of the fish.
The general economic problem of maximizing the present value of harvest from
this cohort may be written
max

[pF(t)N(t)W(t)-C(F(t))]ea-dt

s.t
(47)
Nr= -N(M + F(t)),
where is the opening date (or corresponding age at which a particular mesh size
= (7) captures fish). The solution to this problem depends critically on the
ih
nature of C(.) as would be expected from the discussion in Section 2.
The simplest case is where C(F(t)) = 0 and fishing mortality is unbounded so
that impulse controls F= oo may be applied to harvest all of the biomass
instantly at some particular age. This problem is basically a pure timing problem
like the general asset aging model discussed earlier and the solution involves
finding the optimal date * at which to harvest all of the biomass. Not surprisingly, the optimal date can be characterized as a point *, where allowing the
biomass one more time unit of growth results in an increase in value just equal to
the opportunity cost of waiting that unit of time. In this case with zero harvesting
costs, the integrand in (47) becomes
V(t) = pF(t)N(t)W(t) = pF(t)B(t).
To determine B(t), we note that eq. (46) with F= 0 determines the number of
recruits entering the fishery and (45) gives the weight per fish so that we have
B(t)lF=o = N(t)W(t) = Noe-MtW(1 - e-K) 3 .
(48)
Without fishing, biomass reaches a maximum at a point where (B/B) = (N/N)
+ (W/W) = 0. By (46), (N/N) = -M without fishing so that biomass reaches a
maximum where (W/IW)- M= 0. Once fishing is applied, beginning at some
point t = , the biomass is reduced by fishing mortality as well as natural
mortality. For a constant level of fishing mortality F, the total value of the harvest
would be
V(t, F) = Nop

Fe-Mte-(t)W(t)e-tdt.

(49)

100

With an impulse control of F = oo at t = , (49) approaches a finite limit; namely
the value of the biomass level of date i. The date at which to harvest is easily seen
as that for which

dV()=V(i*)

(50)

as in the basic timing problem introduced in Section 2. In this fisheries problem,
if price is constant, the optimal impulse-harvest date is where

dt |F=O = B(i),

(51)

which occurs where [W([)/W(i)] = M + &. As in the basic example discussed in
Section 2, in this case the higher the discount rate the sooner the harvest. Also
similarly, with zero costs and constant prices, the optimal harvest date is independent of the price level and depends only on selecting the date which balances the
"own biological interest rate" (pB/pB) with the discount rate.
More general models with positive harvesting costs may also be analyzed but
with more analytical complexity and perhaps somewhat less intuitive results. For
example, costs may be considered linear so that C(F(t)) = C F(t) [Clark (1976)].
In this case, the solution involves a bang-bang control where no effort is applied
until biomass grows beyond the level indicated in (51). Then a positive level of
effort is applied for an interval of time [tL, to] which reduces the biomass to the
level where pB(to)= C (see Figure 2.15). As C -- O,tL -.
and the optimal
biomass path approaches the vertical asymptote at . Thus the previous impulseharvest problem is the limiting case of the linear cost problem.
With harvesting costs exhibiting adjustment costs, i.e. with C(F(t)) where
Ci > 0 and C" * 0, the optimal solution involves a similar harvesting pattern
where the biomass is allowed tb grow until some critical time and then harvesting
decreases the biomass. In this case, the optimal harvest rate adjusts so that an
equality similar to that in the asset aging problem is maintained continuously
throughout the harvest period. Let El = pBF, - C(Ft). Then the optimal harvest
rate is such that"1
dtI

dt

F ) I dF) B-p
oF
=8( d

(52)

F

Since the growth constraint N/N = - (M + F) defines a relationship between N
1 This is derived as follows. The current valued Hamiltonian is
,a) H=pBF- C(F) + XB, where B = B [-(M+ F)+ (/W)].
The optimal level of fishing mortality satisfies:
(b) 17F--pB- C'( F) = B.
The shadow price must evolve according to:
(c)
- 8X= - H,= -pF - X[-(M+ F)+(/WW)I.
f we multiply this equation by B and rearrange, we get
(d) XB + BX- BA = --pBF.
Bu; by (b) above, XB + BA = 'F, so that the optimal path calls for:

1

F,(t)

8
81F(t)
=

pBF.

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

101

B

C/p
M+8

M
/W

t

to

to

t

Figure 2.15. Optimal harvesting of a Beverton-Holt population- without costs of adjustment.

and F, and since B. = NtW,, (52) can be solved for either the optimal path of F,*
or for B*, or Nt* as a function of Wt and the other parameters. Although the
solution is not readily obvious, its properties are qualitatively like the "turnpike"
results discussed in Section 2. For example, if we consider the case where
C(F,) = C (F 2 /2) the optimal biomass and fishing effort levels must satisfy
W

p-F]

(53)

whenever F is positive. For this problem there is an initial phase where harvesting
is not optimal; namely during periods ("close" to t = 0) when W/W is large.
When W/ W is large and positive, the own biological rate of interest (W/ W- M)
exceeds the discount rate and hence it pays to leave fish in the "biological bank".
As time progresses WI/W decreases until at t = , the own biological interest rate
equals the discount rate. At this point harvesting begins and biomass is reduced
to zero asymptotically. Figure 2.16 compares this more general nonlinear case

102

J. E. Wilen

t

tL

to

Figure 2.16. Optimal harvesting with adjustment costs- the Beverton-Holt model.

with the linear case. For this problem (with adjustment costs), the optimal path
involves harvesting sooner because of the high costs which would otherwise be
incurred if the harvest path more closely followed the linear-case singular path.
Note, however, that the optimal path stays relatively close to its linear counterpart in the manner of the turnpike property discussed in Section 2.
4.3.3. Intragenerationalinterdependencies due to timing
The above model is applicable in situations where, as discussed before, there are
virtually no density-dependent intergenerational links and generation time is
fixed. A second situation which requires a slight modification is where there are
intergenerational timing links occuring through the generation time. For example,
in a mature forest, the canopy cover will be such that the next generation will be
completely and continuously out competed by mature trees. As soon as mature
trees are cut, however, the next generation seedlings begin to grow and hence the
earlier (in age) one cuts the forest, the sooner new stocks can start and so on. This

103

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

problem is a version of the point-input point-output problem already discussed
except that the use of a critical fixed factor (space) must be optimized. The
problem is the same one faces, for example, if one has fixed storage space and is
deciding how to store bottles of wine that are increasing in value. The sooner one
is removed, the sooner a new one can be started aging, etc.
To understand the nature of this problem, assume that we have a forest, or
wine cellar, or herd of domestic animals, etc. on fixed space and the value of each
cohort grows as a function of age. If there are also some fixed costs of amount C,
incurred per harvest or sale we have:
PV= e-8t'[V(t) - C] +e-a'2[

(t)

- C] +

.

(54)

To make the problem tractable, assume that soil conditions, etc. do not deteriorate between rotations and that real prices and costs are constant. Then the
problem looks the same from any time period we consider it (assuming infinite
horizon) and tk = k t. This reduces the series in (54) to
PV= e-'[

V(t)- C)] +e-82'[V(t) - C) + .

= Ee-rti[V(t)-C]= [V(t)- C]

1

(55)

Differentiating (55) with respect to t yields, after rearranging:
fl(t*) = SII(t*)(

1 e

),

(56)

where H(t) = V(t)- C. Note that this form is similar to both (20) and (52) in
that the optimal time to harvest is one that almost equates the gain from waiting
an extra unit of time (i.e. leaving one's capital in the forest bank) with the
financial opportunity cost over the same period [i.e. 8H(t)]. The "almost" part is
a modification in the basic rule which results in a harvesting date slightly sooner
than the date where /l(t) = S1(t). The intuition behind this is precisely that the
intergenerational link makes it costly to wait too long with the existing crop since
the whole sequence of future crops is thereby postponed. Thus, the optimal timing
involves balancing off the gains from waiting one more time unit with the existing
crop (t) against the costs - consisting of opportunity costs on the existing
standing crop [H(t)] and the opportunity costs associated with not harvesting
and beginning future rotations sooner. The latter opportunity costs can be seen
from the above by noting that the RHS term in (56) can be rearranged to get
H

j(t)(
ll

e-)=8rH(t)+81(t)( et'_1)

(57)

But the second term on the RHS of (57) is simply 8PV(t) from (55) above, i.e. it
is the annualized value of the present value of the whole set of harvest rotations.
This term is often referred to as the site rent Rs(t) and it is basically the amount

J.E.

104

ilen

that the owner of the land should impute as a value to the piece of space involved.
Since the owner always has the option of immediately harvesting the existing crop
and (for example) selling the land at a price equal to (55) (presuming the best use
is in the current crop and that the land market is competitive), he should be
continuously "charging" himself an implicit rental rate equal to the annualized
value of the land sale value (RS= 8 PV) when he chooses not to sell and
continue another year with the existing crop.
It almost goes without saying that structuring the above foresting problem in
this particular way makes it a timing problem rather than an investment/disinvestment problem. By assuming simply fixed per rotation costs, we have disallowed any costs of adjustment which would make impulse controls (i.e. taking all
of the standing crop at the instant t = t*) suboptimal. A more general model with
adjustment costs in harvesting would mix features of the Beverton-Holt single
cohort model discussed earlier with the timing model just discussed [see Clark
(1976)]. One would expect similarly mixed results, i.e. a continual harvest phase
which allows standing crop value to peak and then decline as the harvest rate
within each rotation increased. There are some problems with this more general
structure, however, since one has to assume for tractability either (i) no trees grow
where others have already been harvested until the last tree in the stand is taken;
or (ii) the forest is already in an optimal uneven-age equilibrium configuration so
that the yield over the span of any single rotation is equal to the yield of a given
single-aged forest. The first assumption is unrealistic and the second assumption
begs the difficult question of deciding how to get the forest in an optimal
equilibrium forest in the first place [see Heaps and Neher (1979)].
4.3.4. Density-dependent intragenerationalinterdependencies
The final important class of models among nonoverlapping generations consists
of those having to do with density-dependent intragenerational effects, i.e. where
the numbers of organisms escaping capture in the previous generation affects the
current generation's size. This is, it should be noted, a problem of determining
numbers to be harvested (or actually, allowed to "escape" to become reproducers)
as opposed to biomass as in previous models. Optimal escapement models are
applicable in situations where harvesting must take place before recruits enter
into the reproductive phase, for example, with ocean or river mouth fishing for
salmon.
Let us refer to the recruits of generation k (Rk) as those organisms surviving
early mortality phases to the point where they may either be harvested in amount
Hk or become parent stock Pk or escapement which determine the size of the next
generations recruit stock, i.e.
Rk+l = F(Pk) = F(Rk - Hk).

(58)

Examples of this form were discussed earlier in the case of the Ricker model,

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

105

where stability in discrete generation models were discussed. We will assume that
F' > 0 throughout so that the overcompensation cases giving rise to population
oscillations are ruled out. (See discussion in Section 3.3.)
Let II(Hk, Rk) = pHk - C(Hk, Rk) be the profits from harvesting recruits for a
given generation and let i equal the discrete discount rate applicable to the length
of the generation time. Then the economic problem is to determine a feasible
sequence of harvests {(H, H 2 ,... ) which maximizes
PV= E H(R

k,

Hk) 1

(59)

k=O

subject to (58). This can be formulated in a manner completely analogous to the
continuous problem discussed in Section 2, and the solution is likewise similar;
namely, there exists some steady state escapement level P* = R* - H* which just
balances off current marginal profit losses (gains) associated with allowing
(harvesting) one more unit escapement with the higher (lower) subsequent profits
for the new sustained escapement level. For a general profit function HL(R, H)
this condition can be written as [see Clark (1976)]
(I+i)F(P)

-(d+daH

a

(60)

The approach path in this discrete case also depends upon 1H and particularly on
the nature of adjustment costs. If costs are linear in H, the adjustment path is a
most rapid approach path to P*, and if costs increase at an increasing rate in H,
the adjustment is asymptotic.
4.4. Overlapping generations models

There are, in fact, very few situations in nature where organisms are segregated by
cohorts in such a way that nonoverlapping generations models are accurate
depictions of reality. As will be seen, the tractability of even these simple models
rapidly disappears as more real-world complexities are introduced. As we move
closer to more precise depictions of real populations, where different age and size
classes are mixed, the analytical difficulties increase many fold. In this section,
some examples of mixed-cohort models are discussed, some with corresponding
optimal harvest solutions and some without. It is this "gray area" between simple
single-cohort models and equally simple lumped parameter models (which aggregate and ignore age-specific complications) that is closest to reality but, as a
consequence, also closest to being analytically intractable.
The difficulties involved in modeling overlapping generations stem from two
factors - the degree of interdependence between organisms and the general inability in most real-world cases to selectively harvest due to the mixed structure of the
population. Interdependencies between organisms in the same population may
take many forms, including density-interdependence within cohorts of a single

106

J.E. Wilen

age class (e.g. when juveniles segregate and feed on a particular nutrient source),
interdependence between cohorts depending upon total food supply and total
population size, interdependence depending upon age distribution of the population (e.g. when there is cannibalism of juveniles by certain age classes), etc. In
addition, there may be complex interdependencies between organisms in a given
population and those in subsequent generations depending upon similar factors
as just discussed. With respect to harvesting selectivity, cases range from circumstances where age/size can be perfectly selected and targeted, to the more
common case of being able to select between two aggregate groups (e.g. when
minimum mesh size is specified, or when forked-horn antler or full curl horn
requirements are imposed in hunting), to no selectivity such as is the case in a
trawl or hook-and-line fishing where each cohort's catch is roughly proportional
to numbers present in the total population. In general, we would expect that the
more complex are the interdependencies and the less selective the gear, the more
difficult it is to characterize the optimal solution to the harvesting problem.
The easiest case to analyze is where organisms overlap but there are no
intragenerational interdependencies and no intergenerational interdependencies
between cohorts of the same population. In this case, we have basically a layered
Beverton-Holt model in which the population consists of many age classes, each
growing in total biomass until some age a and then declining. Assume that
recruitment to each age class is constant and independent of population size and
age structure and that the generation time or time that organisms spend in the
recruit phase is T. Then as we successively add and overlap new generations of
cohorts over the interval (0, T), we will obtain biomass curves which look like
those in Figure 2.17. Note that as more generations are added, the population
biomass approaches a constant equilibrium level with a particular equilibrium
size/age distribution implied.
The first case to consider is where harvesting gear is completely nonselective.
Let N(t, a) be the remaining numbers of organisms at year t who entered the
fishery as recruits in year a. Let w(t, a) be the weight of a fish from cohort a at
time t. Then the total biomass of age class a will be (without fishing)
B(t, a) = N(t, a)w(t, a),
t > a.
(61)
The total fishable biomass at any point in time t will thus be the sum of all
biomass from each age class a at time t, or
a=t

B(t) =

E

N(t, a)w(t, a),

a=t-T

and the general economic problem is to maximize

PV=
dS.
r
dN(ta)
dt

e - r' [F(t)B(t) - C(F(t))] dt
M0+ F~t)] N
a)(63)
-

[M+ F(t)] N(t, a).

(62)

107

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use
B

t

B

t

B

t
Figure 2.17. Biomass with overlapping generation.

Note that the formulation implies that harvesting will be taking from all age
classes in proportion to their abundance in the total population-a feature of
many bottom fish fisheries and other circumstances (perhaps bird and mammal
hunting) where no selectivity is practiced.
The general problem in (64) has not been solved, although solutions to special
cases have been attempted [see Clark (1971)]. The simplest case is one where
C[F(t)] = 0 and price per unit biomass is constant. In this case, if we start with
low fishable biomass, the growth in biovalue will be as shown in Figure 2.18. At

108

J.E. Wilen
B

L

I__

t

I

T

Ts

V*= PV*e

t/

t*

2t/

t

2t*

t

Figure 2.18. Nonselective harvesting in an overlapping generating population with zero costs.

first glance this looks like a rotation-type problem and, in fact, it has been cast as
such in an attempt to solve it. This approach appears to be incorrect, however,
since if successive cohorts are staged to enter the fishery as recruits in fixed
intervals (usually one year in nature), then harvesting does not allow immediate
re-initializing of the population as is assumed with forests. As we showed in the
forestry case, waiting to harvest the current crop involves two costs; one on the
current standing crop and the other on subsequent crops which could have been
started immediately. This is a problem involving intragenerational interdependen-

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

109

cies due to timing but, in an overlapping cohort fishery, there are no such
interdependencies if the staging time between cohorts is exogenously fixed. Given
that this is the case, the problem reduces to one of maximizing the present value
of each set of cohorts overlapping in any given interval [t - kT, t], where k is the
(integer) number of cohorts which stage Ts periods apart over a total recruit
interval T.
The solution to the above problem is basically similar to the one-shot timing
problem introduced in Section 2. In the lower diagram of Figure 2.18, if the
discount rate is 8, pulse harvesting at t* maximizes the present value of the mixed
cohort fishery. One can effectively optimize harvests over a given group of mixed
cohorts since the timing of subsequent recruits is not affected. Note that as 8
increases to 8', the harvest interval is reduced. In the example shown where k = 3
and T = 1/3 T, harvesting takes place during recruitment of the third, sixth,
ninth and so on cohorts with a discount rate of 8 and the second, fourth, sixth
and so on with a discount rate of 8'. Thus, with nonselectivity and zero costs, the
optimal overlapping generations problem collapses to a relatively simple sequence
of single-shot timing problems.
With selectivity in harvesting, through mesh or hook size or minimum size
regulations, for example, the optimal policy follows readily from the above as
long as costs can be ignored. In situations where age of first capture may be
chosen and smaller fish excluded from harvest, it is obvious that present value will
improve over the no-selectivity case just discussed. In particular, we know from
our earlier discussion that for single cohort harvesting with zero costs, the optimal
mesh size is one associated with the size where the own biological rate of interest
is just equal to the discount rate, or
W(t )

M= .

(64)

Thus, the global optimum for the zero cost mixed-cohort case is one achieved by
using a mesh size corresponding to (64). By pulse-fishing the fishery with the
optimal mesh size, it is possible to optimize returns from each cohort separately
and hence from all cohorts together. With cohorts entering the fishery in identical
intervals and with identical numbers in the initial recruitment, the fishable
biomass and yield will be approaching uniformity over time as Figure 2.19 shows.
In the limit, with continuously infinite ("chattering") effort being applied, the
continuous yield will approach the biomass of a given cohort at age . With
cohorts entering in nonuniform and/or at different initial levels, the optimal
policy will still be the same, but of course the fishery will not be characterizable in
any equilibrium fashion.
The introduction of costs of harvesting complicates the picture considerably
and, in fact, the problem has not been solved analytically although some

J.E. Wilen

110

a

Figure 2.19. Perfect selectivity in an overlapping generating population with zero costs.

numerical studies have been done [Hannesson (1975)]. One situation where the
problem is not different from a sequence of single-cohort selectivity problems is
where recruits enter into a fishery in a staggered fashion with a staging time Ts
between years classes which is longer than the time needed to optimally harvest a
single cohort. Consider Figure 2.20, for example, where biomass of a given cohort
without fishing has some finite life T after which the last fish dies. As we showed
in the previous section, the optimal biomass path for a single cohort when costs
are proportional to fishing effort follows the darkened line so that total harvesting
time Th = t o - tL. An additional At c units of time pass before the first cohort
completely disappears after being fished down to pB(to)= C (note that Th is
smaller as C gets larger). If it happens that the staging time between cohorts T is
greater than Th + Ate, then there is no problem of "cohort overlap" and one can
simply choose mesh size corresponding to age tL, harvest the first cohort for Th
periods, pause, and then harvest the next cohort as was done initially with the
first. Obviously one cannot improve on the case which effectively optimizes each
cohort separately.
As the staging time decreases relative to the harvest period Th (which depends
and C/P), cohorts overlap so that the originally optimal attempt to
upon
optimally harvest the first cohort will (for the mesh size corresponding to tL)
begin to pick up the second cohort's members as well. This is illustrated with the
dotted lines; notice that during the early period of the second cohort's harvest,
there are still first cohort members in the total biomass subject to capture. Thus
the general problem is: when there are harvesting costs, what is overall optimal
policy regarding effort levels, harvest intervals and mesh size with potentially

111

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

i

Th

-----i

ate

T
Figure 2.20. Optimal selective harvesting in overlapping populations- with costs.

overlapping cohorts? Notice that there is a link between staging time T, and some
critical mesh size size m(T) or equivalently, critical starting harvest date tL. If we
can postpone harvesting past the date which causes overlapping and then harvest
with a larger mesh and at a higher rate until pB(to) = C is reached, the delay (as
long as T is not shorter than tc) will just allow us to harvest each stock
separately. This is possible (see Figure 2.20) because delaying harvest shortens Th
and hence makes it less likely for given T, that there will be overlap. Thus the
problem could be solved if we could show that either it always pays to adjust
mesh size to selectively harvest, or it never pays, etc. Unfortunately it is not clear
whether either of these is generally true. It appears from empirical work that the
answer may depend on the problem's parameters, and hence, in general, it may be
optimal either to separately harvest cohorts in succession or harvest them together
in overlapping populations. In the latter case, the earlier discussed mixed-cohort
timing solution is apparently relevant but the path of harvesting and the mesh
size in this case with positive harvesting costs have not been determined analyti-

112

J.E. Wilen

cally. One can conjecture, however, that the solution would look like the singlecohort analogue, with a period allowing the mixed stock to build up, followed by
sustained effort to drive it to the breakeven point, followed by a new sequence,
etc. The optimal mesh size probably has to be one which allows harvesting to
effectively separate the mixed-stock harvesting regimes somehow.
Beyond these attempts, little has been achieved in tackling more general models
analytically. The critical simplifying assumption which needs relaxing to fit
real-world circumstances is the assumption of no intragenerational links. A more
complete model needs to account not only for the age/size specifics of the
individual cohorts but also for density-dependent relationships between numbers
in one cohort and those in the next. Thus, a hybrid of the Beverton-Holt and
stock recruitment models is needed. From all current indications, however, it
appears that such a model with realistic cost assumptions is analytically untractable and perhaps better approached with simulation techniques or by aggregating
and thereby ignoring some of the explicit age/size relationships. Beyond this,
there is need in some populations to consider between-cohort density dependencies. The simplest possibility is to make individual-cohort mortality rates a
function of the total population but this too may miss important relationships
which depend on the age distribution of the population - e.g. where older cohorts
cannibalize younger cohorts.

4.5. Lumped parametermodels
As discussed earlier, when making the modeling steps from individual to cohort
to population we are confronted with different problems of aggregation at each
level. Basically we must decide which features are critical and deserving of special
focus and which may be safely ignored or parameterized in some way. Apparent
from the preceding section is the fact that age/size specific models with realistic
features become unwieldy rapidly, and in particular, when one wishes to include
intragenerational interdependencies, the age/size specific details probably have to
be sacrificed unless simulation studies are undertaken.
Another way to account for stock-recruitment relationships in an overlapping
generations model is to use a "lumped parameter" model in which the object is a
single variable like "numbers" or "biomass" of the organisms. Consider, for
example, a fishery in which recruits live several years and spawning takes place
every year. Clearly at any point in time, the fishable biomass will contain several
cohorts and thus the population will change from year to year in some manner
depending upon their numbers and on their age distribution. For example, an
exceptionally large year class will have impacts which ripple over many successive
generations and the impacts can be complex depending upon density dependent
mechanisms operating between cohorts at each point in time and between

113

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

generations. By making the simplifying assumption that we measure in some units
such as biomass undifferentiated by age/size characteristics, we can model some
of the possible intragenerational complexities at a cost of losing some of the
specific details. These types of models may be appropriate when there is no
harvesting selectivity possible, for example.
Sections 2 and 3 introduced two of the simplest lumped parameter models;
namely, the logistic differential equation model and the discrete Ricker stockrecruitment model. Both of these imply relatively simple intragenerational density-dependent mechanisms which operate instantly (logistic case) or between
adjacent time periods. The stock-recruitment model, in fact, implies that either
organisms are recruited to the reproductive population in the first year and
subsequently have no impact on this stock, or that generations are nonoverlapping and adults die after recruitment. For many species, however, reproductive
maturity is reached only after some considerable time delay and organisms
survive over longer periods. Let Nk+1 be the reproductive population in year
k + 1 and assume that the mortality rate between years of adults is m. If there is a
delay in recruitment such that this year's new adult recruits are a function of
adults /3 years ago, we have a delay-difference equation describing the population; namely,
Nk+ = (1- m)N

k

+ F(NK_$).

(65)

Clark (1976) has derived a solution to the fixed proportional costs optimal
harvesting problem for this delay difference equation and the solution appears
similar qualitatively to the simple one period delay already discussed. In particular, there is an optimal steady-state stock N* defined by
(l+i)[(lm)+(l

+i)

F(N)]( HI

a

d

(66)l

where H is as defined before. Note that this collapses to the solution derived
earlier when m = 1 and = 0, the one period stock recruitment case. The optimal
approach to N* in this more general case is no longer a most rapid approach
path, but numerical methods applied to parameters for the Baleen Whale by
Clark show that a MRAP is close to optimal.
For many species and harvesting situations, a discrete model is most appropriate. In fact, it is frequently the case that species give birth every year so that
cohorts overlap by roughly one calendar year - particularly in temperate climates.
In other cases, however, species may mate several times per year and even
continuously in tropical climates. In these cases, we have overlapping generations
but with very short staging times. In the limiting case where generations overlap
continuously, we have a differential equation model of population growth.
The simplest way to arrive at a continuous overlapping generation model is to
begin with a Ricker-type model where population members reproduce in genera-

114

J.E. Wilen

tions which live T years each. Then, if we add in other members uniformly in the
interval [0, T], the limit of such a process can be described with the delay-differential equation

N(t) = N(t)[G(N(t -

(67)

T))].

In this simplest case (uniform distribution is important), the functional form of G
can be related to the corresponding difference equation form F so that with the
appropriate choice of discrete model, we might have something like
T(t)

=rN(t1

r)

(68)

describing a logistic-type model of population growth. The dynamic behavior of
this particular form depends critically, as did the discrete model, on r, the
product of the intrinsic growth rate and the generation time. The breakpoint
between stabilizing and oscillating behavior is where r = (11/2) [May (1973)].
For values less than (/2)= 1.5707, the system converges to a single stable
equilibrium point N* = K, and for values greater, the system oscillates in a limit
cycle whose amplitude is increasingly severe as r gets larger [Jones (1962)].
A more general form which exhibits the wide variety of behavior earlier
discussed for difference equations is [May (1980)]
N= -N+

R[N(t-

(69)

)1.

This is essentially the form utilized by the International Whaling Commission to
model whale populations with

R[N(t-

)]

N(t- r)[p

+ q{1

[N(t-

)

z

J.

(70)

In this model as lengthens and the density affects become increasingly severe
(as Z increases), the model exhibits a stable equilibrium point, regular limit
cycles, a hierarchy of cycles with doubling periodicity, and finally aperiodic or
chaotic behavior with no recognizable structure. Interestingly, beyond the chaotic
region lies another region where the system collapses back to simple limit cycle
behavior.
Note that the above models (68) and (69) are essentially derived by uniformly
overlapping a sequence of nonoverlapping populations whose individual generation times are . There are no explicit between-cohort density effects, and the
resulting aggregated model reflects individual cohort-density effects and the
general impact of the parent population exactly T periods ago on today's (period
t) population. More realistically, without a uniform initial distribution and with
density effects that may occur at nondiscrete intervals of the life cycle, we would
expect population changes today to be related in some more generally weighted
fashion to past populations, rather than just the population years ago. Thus a

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

115

generalized [May (1973)] version of the delay-differential model is
A(t)=rN(t)[1

-fi

N(s)w(t-s)ds],

(71)

where w(t - s) is a weighting function. The weighting function has some average
time delay To associated with it and it turns out that the stability properties of this
model are similar to (68) above; namely that for critical values of r, = 1.5, the
system exhibits either stabilizing or oscillating behavior, depending upon whether
rTO is less than or greater than the critical value, respectively. In fact, our constant
generation time model (68) is really a special case of this general model where the
weighting function collapses to a Dirac Delta function (spike) at = T.
Not much work has been done on delay differential equation harvesting models
although if the results from the discrete case are any indication, the qualitative
properties of solutions to simple cases are similar to the instantaneous case. In
particular, as long as the system is stable (which, recall, calls for r to be on the
order of 1.5), it is most likely the case that a long-run steady state stock level N*
exists and is desirable to approach or achieve directly. Consider, as an example,
the system in (68) with R a quadratic function. Figure 2.21 shows the steady-state
yield curve which could be harvested continually if the system were in long-run
equilibrium. Suppose that we wish to get to N* and stay there forever after
inheriting a stock which has been in long-run equilibrium at N. If harvesting is
unconstrained we could instantly reduce the stock level to No = N*e - 1. Then the
stock would grow according to
N(t)= -N

t

R[N(t-)].

(72)

But for the first

periods R[N(t- )] = R(N) and N will simply decline at a
rate - . If further harvesting is avoided over the first
periods, N will simply
decline to N*. At that point, harvesting can proceed by taking just enough to hold
the stock at N*, or
ht+=

-AtN,*r+R[N(t)],

t>T.

(73)

Note that for the next interval [T < t < 2T], R[N(t)] will be changing as it reflects
the decline from N o to N* which took place in [0, T]. Thus, the harvest rate will
increase until t = 2 , at which point it locks into the steady state.
It is reasonable to conjecture similar patterns when there are some constant
unit harvesting costs which (for example) vary with the stock level lower than the
above. With respect to the adjustment phase, again it is reasonable to expect a
near most rapid approach path, with an initial period of zero harvest which allows
delay effects to catch up. The higher the discount rate, of course, the more costly
is this waiting period and hence the value of the liquidation benefits will weigh
heavily in the selection of the ultimate steady state stock. Thus, ceteris paribus, it
is probably the case that optimal steady-state stock levels in delay-systems are

116

.E. Wilen
F(Nt)

Nt

N*

N

No

h

N

J

No -

h = G(n*)t

I
I

J~~~~~

N*
I

I~

r

2r

h = (t)

i

_

h=O

I
E

t

Figure 2.21. Delay-differential logistic model.

I
2r

t

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

117

lower than in nondelay systems. Note, in addition, that stability of the system is
important here since one cannot even achieve a steady-state stock level if the
system is oscillatory. For these cases, the optimal solution is obviously much more
complicated.

5. Summary and conclusions
This chapter has examined a range of models of optimal use of renewable natural
resources. We began by using the simple logistic model to introduce problems of
natural resource use and to illustrate the qualitative characteristics of timing and
investment/disinvestment problems. Next, a fairly extensive examination of
population processes was undertaken, framed in the concepts of r- and K-selection. This was done more as a pedagogical device to group organisms we observe
in nature according to characteristics and their roles in the system. In reality, a
whole spectrum exists with mixed and overlapping characteristics, but, as a rough
guide, it is useful to think of extreme r-selected species as having high fecundity
and mortality, small size, low generation times, and spatially mobile opportunistic
behavior, whereas K-selected organisms are generally larger, longer-lived, slower
growing, and more sedentary.
Given all of this natural variety in characteristics, it is risky, at best, to try to
generalize and draw some broad conclusions. Nevertheless, there are a few
synthesizing remarks which seem worth making if for no other reason but to
stimulate thoughts. Perhaps not surprisingly, these thoughts fall out of an
intellectual view which places man in the system as just another predator. With
that perspective, the interesting questions have to do with how to "best" fit (as an
exploiter) into a system which has evolved over numerous generations (often not
exploited by men).
One obvious starting point is that man derives many values from his "use" of
natural populations-from aesthetic-based, nonconsumptive, and nonparticipative values which are essentially "existence" values for natural systems to participative but nonconsumptive use values related to the stock size (e.g. bird
watching) to the more familiar consumptive uses derived from harvesting.
The extent to which man succeeds in being an "efficient" component of the
system has to do with how well his actions taken to use the system translate into
values that he desires and how much and what kind of "feedback" the exploited
natural system produces. At one end of the possibilities are situations where the
values relate to an undisturbed system and the actions taken to produce those
values are "benign". At the other end are circumstances where even minimal
direct use of the system to obtain certain values completely overwhelms the
"resilience bounds" of the system and collapse results. In between these cases, we

J.E. Wilen

118
Table 2.2
Biological parameter
Intrinsic growth rate
Generation time
Breeding interval
Biomass

Economic parameter
r

8

T

Ts
B V

discount rate
planning period
harvesting selectivity
net value

have a myriad of choice problems which involve precisely how to be an efficient
"predator" and maximize values derived.
The section on population models and optimal use is a broad overview of the
range of models which have been developed and the qualitative characteristics of
some optimal use problems. The characteristics of optimal use patterns depend
upon the interplay between biological and economic factors, of course, and there
are some generalizations which can be made relating to an organism's position on
the r-K spectrum. Table 2.2 lists some key biological parameters and some paired
economic factors which characterize harvesting problems in particular.
For extreme r-selected species, r is high, is low (less than one year), and T, is
also low- usually coincident with . In temperate and more extreme climates,
r-selected species are often locked into a one-year cycle where each generation is
born, grows, reproduces, and dies in a year. In tropical climates, and Ts may be
still low, but the species breeds continuously. Generally speaking, r-selected
species are small and hence have a relatively low gross value per unit mass. Thus,
with a few exceptions, costs of harvesting largely determine whether a species is
feasible to exploit or not. Harvesting costs, moreover, are determined largely by
the patchiness of the species. Small organisms spread out over large areas are too
costly, whereas those which agglomerate or are otherwise densely found may be
worth harvesting.
The principal economic problems (or efficiency problems) for r-selected species
have to do mostly with timing rather than investment or disinvestment. Since
r-selected species are mobile and small, they often become feasible economically
only during a very short window in their lifetime - usually near their reproductive
period. In the herring roe fishery, for example, harvest takes place only when the
herring are schooled up during spawning. The timing that takes place in this
fishery is often determined on-line and down to the minute in order to maximize
roe biomass.
The more towards the r-selection end of the spectrum a species is, the smaller it
will be, the shorter its generation time, and generally the more expensive it will be
to harvest selectively. In temperate climates with one reproductive cycle per
economic planning period (year), it will usually not be necessary to selectively
harvest anyway since generations will not overlap. If escapement must be
guaranteed for these species, it is most easily met with escapement targets rather

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

119

than mesh size. In temperate climates, however, since cohorts will overlap and
since harvesting may take place continuously, it may be necessary to use mesh
size restrictions or other means to optimize both harvest and escapement.
In summary, for extreme r-selected species, the technology which has evolved
(e.g. purse seines) and the biological mechanisms inherent in the species both lead
to planning problems which are more likely to be short-horizon timing problems
which imply impulse-type controls as the most efficient way to harvest. As we
showed in Section 4, the characteristics of these solutions involve waiting until
biomass reaches a certain critical age and then harvesting quickly. Usually, the
discount rate 8 is unimportant since it is swamped by r. The smaller the ratio
(8/r), the closer the critical date of first harvesting to maximum age. Similarly,
the lower the costs of harvesting, the more complete will be the harvest (neglecting escapement concerns) and the shorter the harvest period. Thus, generally for
these species, the goal of maximum physical yield is close to maximum economic
yield.
In contrast, as we move towards K-selected species, r is low relative to 8 and T
is long relative to the planning period. A low r means that the stock responds
sluggishly to harvesting moratoria (investment) and in addition, since K-selected
organisms are spread out over space, they become more costly to reduce (disinvest) as stock size gets smaller. Hence, K-selected species are characterized by
adjustment costs and therefore present investment/disinvestment problems rather
than (or in addition to) timing problems.
In addition, since T is long and generally greater than Ts (i.e. the species breeds
several times over a lifetime), the population will almost always overlap and
consist of mixed sizes and ages. Fortunately, the larger the organism, the more
feasible it becomes to use technologies and practices that are selective. Thus, the
critical economic and efficiency problems have to do with determining the optimal
biomass size, how to achieve it, and, perhaps most important, the composition of
the harvest which will maximize the present value of resource flows over time.
As we saw in Section 4, the problems of determining optimal harvesting in
mixed age/size populations is analytically difficult and generally unsolved. For
simple circumstances, we can say some things, however. First, the discount rate is
important in these problems, and, generally speaking, the higher the discount
rate, the sooner one harvests a given cohort. Second, the qualitative nature of the
solution depends dramatically on the types of costs incurred in harvesting. If
costs are zero and perfect selectivity can be practiced, it is possible to optimize
each cohort in a mixed age/size population separately. With positive but linear
costs, it is no longer possible to generally characterize the optimal solution. Even
if perfect selectivity is possible, it may be optimal to pulse harvest the population
(use no selectivity) every few time periods, or alternatively it may be optimal to
selectively harvest single cohorts more frequently. The answer appears to depend
upon the costs and benefits of using more selective measures which, in turn,

120

J.E. Wilen

depend in a complex way on the generation time and the breeding interval T,.
The lower the ratio (TJT), the more generations overlap and the more likely it is
that one cannot answer the optimal harvesting pattern question readily.
Finally, a key aspect of K-selected organisms is their ability to adapt to altered
densities by maturing earlier, changing mating behavior, etc. Thus, there is a
complicated relationship between population dynamics, species density, and the
Logistic Model
Nt '

P(Nt)

At

T

-

Irl

·

_I .

Differential

Discrete Loglst1C

Delay Model

Nt - J(Nt-T)

Nt+At - G (Nt)
+

t

Continuous and
Uniform Overlap

T + At

Dirac at s - t -

w(s)

Weighted Average Model

Nonoverlapping Generation Model
(Ricker Recruitment)
Nt

i

H(Nt-_)

Nt ' R

I

w(s)N(s)ds

- R[N(t-r)]

B/H Mixed Age Class Model

B(t) - Z
a

t
f N(s,a)v(s,a)ds

Ricker Recruitment Model
Nt

-

Overlap Cohorts Uniformly
Constant Recruitment R

H(Nt-T)

I

B/H Nonoverlappin Generation Model
B(t,a) as below. N(t)
R (exogenous)
t

Dynamic Pool Model
Mixed B/H-Ricker
B(t,a) as below
N(t) - H(N-_ T )
Bevertor Holt
t
B(t,a) -

f

I

(B/u)

Single Cohort Model

N(s,a)w(s,a)ds

W(t)

t
Figure 2.22. Logistic model.

W
o

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

121

age/size/sex distribution of the population. If selectivity is possible, both numbers and characteristics of those harvested must be chosen to optimize values
derived. Thus, for example, if it is desired to adjust a deer population in a natural
or overharvested equilibrium to a new one with a large number of large-antlered
trophy males, it is obvious that the internal dynamics and age/sex structure
consideration make the problem nontrivial. Similarly, if imperfect or zero selectivity hold, then each harvest rate and profile will have different impacts on the
distribution of characteristics in the population. Finally, the longer is T, the more
likely it is that the population will oscillate in its approach to any equilibrium.
This likelihood increases if harvesting also causes r to go up as density thins.
The above suggest that the logistic model is an oversimplification at best and
perhaps better reserved for pedagogical uses with the caveat that it has little
relevance to many (if any) real-world situations. It is not relevant to r-selection
harvesting situations and is less relevant to K-selection cases because harvest
patterns change the functional form as they impact the population distribution.
One can relax the restrictive assumptions implicit in the logistic model and move
towards simple and then complicated differential delay systems (see Figure 2.22),
but to be accurate one still must know how harvesting different numbers with
different age/size/sex characteristics affects the delays, weighting functions, etc.
Hence, in the end, if we are interested in real-world management problems, we
are inevitably forced to disaggregate to pick up the more complicated features of
mixed age populations. Unfortunately, these appear to be the most intractable
analytically for reasons discussed in Section 4. However, they have not really been
given much attention until recently, and perhaps continued analytical and simulation work will shed further insight into the nature of solutions.
References
Allen, R.L. and P. Basasibwaki (1974) "Properties of Age-Structured Models for Fish Populations",
Journalof the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 31, 1119-1125.
Anderson, L. (1977) The Economics of Fisheries Management (Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore) p. 214.
Arrow, K.J. (1964) "Optimal Capital Policy, the Cost of Capital, and Myopic Decision Rules", Annals
of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics 16, 21-20.
Arrow, K.J. (1968) "Optimal Capital Policy With Irreversible Investment", in: J.N. Wolfe (ed.),
Value, Capital and Growth, Papers in Honour of Sir John Hicks (Edinburgh University Press)
pp. 1-20.
Bagenel, T.B. (1976) "A Short Review of Fish Fecundity", in: S.B. Gerking (ed.), The Biological Basis
of Freshwater Fish Production (John Wiley and Sons, New York).
Beddington, J.R. and D.B. Taylor (1973) "Optimum Age Specific Harvesting of a Population",
Biometrics 29, 801-809.
Beverton, R.J.H. and S.J. Holt (1957) On the Dynamics of Exploited Fish Populations (Ministry Agric.
Fish and Food, London) Fish. Invest. Ser 2, no. 19.
Botsford, L.W. (1978) Modeling, Stability, and Optimization of Aquatic Productive Systems, Ph.D.
thesis (University of California, Davis).
Botsford, L.W. (1981) "Optimal Fishery Policy for Size-Specific, Density-Dependent Population
Models", Journal of Mathematical Biology 12, 265-293.

122

J.E. Wilen

Botsford, L.W. and D.E. Wickham (1978) "Behavior of Age-Specific, Density-Dependent Models and
the Northern California Dungeness Crab Fishery", Journalof Fishery Resources Board Canada 35,
833-843.
Brauer, F. (1977) "Stability of Some Population Models with Delay", Mathematical Bioscience 33,
345-358.
Brauer, F. and D.A. Sanchez (1975) "Constant Rate Population Harvesting: Equilibrium and
Stability", Theoretical PopulationBiology 8, 12-30.
Brown, G., Jr. (1974) "An Optimal Program for Managing Common Property Resources With
Congestion Externalities", Journalof Political Economy 82, 163-174.
Caughley, G. (1966) "Mortality Patterns in Mammals", Ecology 47, no. 6 pp. 906-918.
Clark, C.W. (1971) "Economically Optimal Policies for the Utilization of Biologically Renewable
Resources", MathematicalBioscience 12, 245-260.
Clark, C.W. (1976) "A Delayed-Recruitment Model of Population Dynamics, With An Application to
Baleen Whale Population", Journal of Mathematical Biology 3, 381-391.
Clark, C.W. (1973a) "The Economics of Overexploitation", Science 181, 630-634.
Clark, C.W. (1973b) "Profit Maximization and the Extinction of Animal Species", Journalof Political
Economy 81, 950-961.
Clark, C.W. (1976) Mathematical Bioeconomics: The Optimal Management of Renewable Resources
(John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York) p. 352.
Clark, C.W. and G.R. Munro (1975) "The Economics of Fishing and Modem Capital Theory: A
Simplified Approach", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 2, 92-106.
Clark, C.W. and M. Mangel (1979) "Aggregation and Fishery Dynamics: A Theoretical Study of
Schooling and the Purse Seine Tuna Fisheries", U.S. Fisheries Bulletin 77, no. 2.
Clark, C.W., F.H. Clarke and G.R. Munro (1979) "The Optimal Exploitation of Renewable Resource
Stocks: Problems of Irreversible Investment", Econometrica 47, no. .
Clark, C., G. Edwards and M. Friedlander (1973) "Beverton-Holt Model of A Commercial Fishery:
Optimal Dynamics", Journal Fish. Res. Board Can. 30, 1629-1640.
Crutchfield, J.A. (1975) "An Economic View of Maximum Sustainable Yield", in: P.M. Roedel (ed.),
Optimum Sustainable Yield as a Concept in Fisheries Management, American Fisheries Society
Special Publication No. 9 (Washington, D.C.).
Crutchfield, J.A. and A. Zellner (1962) "Economic Aspects of the Pacific Halibut Fishery", Fishery
Industrial Research, vol. 1, no. 1 (U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.).
Faustmann, M. (1849) "Berechnung des Werthes, Welchen Waldboden Sowie Nach Nicht Haubare
Holzbestande fur die Weldwirtschaft Besitzen", A llgemeine Forst und Jagd Zeitung 25, 441.
Gaffney, M.M. (1960) Concepts of Financial Maturity of Timber and Other Assets (Department of
Agricultural Economics, North Carolina State College, Raleigh).
Hannesson, R. (1975) "Fishery Dynamics: A North Atlantic Cod Fishery", Canadian Journal of
Economics 8, 151-173.
Heaps, T. and P. Neher (1979) "The Economics of Forestry When the Rate of Harvest is Constrained",
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 6, 297-319.
Holling, C.S. (1973) "Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems", Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 4, 1-24.
Hutchison, G.E. (1978) An Introduction to Population Ecology (Yale University Press, New Haven).
Jaquette, D.L. (1972) "A Discrete-Time Population Control Model", Mathematical Bioscience 15,
231-252.
Jones, G.S. (1962) "The Existence of Periodic Solutions of f'(x) = -af(x - 1)[1 + f(x)]", Journal of
Mathematical Analysis and Applications 5, 435-450.
Keyfitz, N. (1968) Introduction to the Mathematics of Population (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.).
Lack, D. (1966) Population Studies of Birds (Clarendon Press, Oxford).
Leslie, P.H., "On the Use of Matrices in Certain Population Mathematics", Biometrika 33, 183-212.
Li, T.Y. and J.A. Yorke (1975) "Period Three Implies Chaos", American MathematicalMonthly 82,
985-992.
Lotka, A.J. (1925) Elements of Physical Biology (Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore).
MacArthur, R.H. and E.R. Pianka (1966) "Optimal Use of a Patchy Environment", American
Naturalist 100, 603-609.
MacArthur, R.H. and R. Levins (1967) "The Limiting Similarity, Convergence and Divergence of
Coexisting Species", American Naturalist 101, 377-385.

Ch. 2: Bioeconomics of Renewable Resource Use

123

MacArthur, R.H. and E.O. Wilson (1967) The Theory of Island Biogeography (Princeton University
Press, Princeton).
May, R.M. (1973a) "Time-Delay Versus Stability in Population Models With Two and Three Trophic
Levels", Ecology 54, 315-325.
May, R.M. (1973) "Stability in Randomly Fluctuating Versus Deterministic Environments", American Naturalist 107, 621-650.
May, R.M. (1973) Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems (Princeton University Press, Princeton).
May, R.M. (1974) "Biological Populations with Nonoverlapping Generations: Stable Points, Stable
Cycles and Chaos", Science 186, 645-647.
May, R.M. (1975) "Biological Populations Obeying Difference Equations: Stable Points, Stable Cycles
and Chaos", Journal of Theoretical Biology 49, 511-524.
May, R.M. (1976) "Mathematical Aspects of the Dynamics of Animal Populations", in: S.A. Levin
(ed.), Studies in Mathematical Biology (American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I.).
May, R.M. (1977) "Simple Mathematical Models with Very Complicated Dynamics", Nature 269,
459-467.
May, R.M. (1977) "Thresholds and Breakpoints in Ecosystems With a Multiplicity of Stable States",
Nature 269, 471-477.
May, R.M. (1979) "The Structure and Dynamics of Ecological Communities", in: R.M. Anderson,
B.D. Turner and L.R. Taylor (eds.), Symposium of British Ecological Society 20, Population
Dynamics (Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford) pp. 385-407.
May, R.M. (1980) "Mathematical Models in Whaling and Fisheries Management", in: G.F. Oster
(ed.), Some Mathematical Questions in Biology, vol. 13 (The American Mathematical Society,
Providence, R.I.) pp. 1-64.
May, R.M. (1981) Theoretical Ecology: Principles and Applications (Sinauer Associates, Sunderland,
Mass.).
May, R.M., G.R. Conway, M.P. Hassell and T.R.E. Southwood (1974) "Time Delays, Density
Dependence, and Single Species Oscillations", Journal of Animal Ecology 43, 747-770.
May, R.M. and G.F. Oster (1976) "Bifurcations and Dynamic Complexity in Simple Ecological
Models", American Naturalist 110, 573-599.
May, R.M., J.R. Beddington, C.W. Clark, S.J. Holt and R.M. Laws (1979) "Management of
Multispecies Fisheries", Science 205, 267-277.
Maynard Smith, J. (1976) "Evolution and the Theory of Games", American Scientist 64, 41-45.
Maynard Smith, J. (1971) Mathematical Ideas in Biology (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England).
Nikolskii, G.V. (1969) Theory of Fish Population Dynamics (Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh).
Oster, G. (1975) "Stochastic Behavior of Deterministic Models", in S.A. Levin (ed.), Ecosystem
Analysis and Prediction (SIAM-SIMS Conference Proceedings, Alta, Utah) pp. 24-37.
Pearl, R. (1930) The Biology of Population Growth (Knopf, New York).
Pearse, P. (1967) "The Optimal Forest Rotation", Forestry Chronicle 43, 178-195.
Pianka, E.R. (1970) "On r- and K-selection", American Naturalist 104, 592-597.
Plourde, C.G. (1970) "A Simple Model of Replenishable Resource Exploitation", American Economic
Review 60, 518-522.
Plourde, C.G. (1971) "Exploitation of Common-Property Replenishable Resources", Western Economic Journal 9, 256-266.
Quirk, J.P. and V.L. Smith (1970) "Dynamic Economic Models of Fishing", in: A.D. Scott (ed.),
Economics of Fisheries Management- A Symposium (University of British Columbia, Institute of
Animal Resource Ecology, Vancouver) pp. 3-32.
Reed, W.J. (1980) "Optimum Age-Specific Harvesting in a Non-linear Population Model", Biometrics
26, 579-593.
Ricker, W.E. (1954) "Stock and Recruitment", Journal of Fisheries Resource Board Canada 11,
559-623.
Rorres, C. (1976) "Optimal Sustainable Yields of a Renewable Resource", Biometrics 32, 945-948.
Rorres, C. and W. Fair (1975) "Optimal Harvesting Policy for an Age-Specific Population", Mathematical Bioscience 24, 31-47.
Rothschild, B.J. (1977) "Fishing Effort", in: J. Gulland (ed.), Fish Population Dynamics (John Wiley
& Sons, New York) p. 372.

124

J.E. Wilen

Schaefer, M.B. (1954) "Some Aspects of the Dynamics of Populations Important to the Management
of the Commercial Marine Fisheries", Bull. Inter-Amer. Trop. Tuna Comm. 1, 26-56.
Schaefer, M.B. (1957) "A Study of the Dynamics of the Fishery for Yellowfin Tuna in the Eastern
Tropical Pacific Ocean", Bull. Inter-Amer. Trop. Tuna Comm. 2, 247-285.
Schaefer, M.B. (1967) "Fishery Dynamics and the Present Status of the Yellowfin Tuna Population of
the Eastern Pacific Ocean", Bull. Inter-Amer. Trop. Tuna Comm. 12, 89-137.
Silliman, R.P. (1969) "Analog Computer Simulation and Catch Forecasting in Commercially Fished
Populations", Trans. Amer. Fish. Soc. 98, pp. 560-569.
Sinko, J.W. and W. Streifer (1967) "A New Model for Age Size Structure of a Population", Ecology
48, 910-918.
Smith, V.L. (1968) "Economics of Production From Natural Resources", American Economic Review
58, 409-431.
Smith, V.L. (1969) "On Models of Commercial Fishing", Journal of Political Economy 77, 181-198.
Solow, R. (1974) "The Economics of Resources or the Resources of Economics", American Economic
Review 64, 1-14.
Southwood, T.R.E. (1975) "The Dynamics of Insect Populations", in: D. Pimentel (ed.), Insects,
Science and Society (Academic Press, New York) pp. 151-199.
Southwood, T.R.E. (1977) "The Relevance of Population Dynamics Theory to Pest Status", in: J.M.
Cherett and G.R. Sagar (eds.), Origin of Pest, Parasite, Disease and Weed Problems (Blackwell
Scientific Publications, Oxford) pp. 35-54.
Southwood, T.R.E. (1981) "Bionomic Strategies and Population Parameters", in: R.M. May, Theoretical Ecology (Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford) pp. 30-52.
Southwood, T.R.E., R.M. May, M.P. Hassell and G.R. Conway (1974) "Ecological Strategies and
Population Parameters", American Naturalist 108, 791-804.
Southwood, T.R.E. and H.N. Comins (1976) "A Synoptic Population Model", Journal of Animal
Ecology 45, 949-965.
Spence, M. (1973) Blue Whales and Applied Control Theory, Technical Report No. 108, (Stanford
University, Institute for Matherhatical Studies in the Social Sciences).
Spence, M. and D. Starrett (1975) "Most Rapid Approach Paths in Accumulation Problems",
International Economics Review 16, 388-403.
Taber, R.D. and R.F. Dasmann (1957) "The Dynamics of Three Natural Populations of the Deer
Odocoileus Homeosus Columbiamus", Ecology 38, 233-248.
Thom, R. (1976) Morphogenesis and Structural Stability (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.).
Verhulst, P.F. (1838) "Notice sur la Loi Que la Population Suit dans son Accroissement", Correspondance Mathematique et Physique 10, 113-121.
Volterra, V. (1931) Lecons sur la Theorie Mathematique de la Lutte pour la Vie (Gauthier-Villars,
Paris).
Walters, C.J. (1969) "A Generalized Computer Simulation Model for Fish Population Studies", Trans.
Amer. Fish. Soc. 98, 505-512.
Watson, A. (1977) "Population Limitation and the Adaptive Value of Territorial Behavior in Scottish
Red Grouse", in: B. Stonehouse and C.M. Perrins (eds.), Evolutionary Ecology (University Park
Press).

