Effective fisheries management instrumental in
improving fish stock status
Ray Hilborna,1, Ricardo Oscar Amorosoa, Christopher M. Andersona, Julia K. Baumb, Trevor A. Brancha,
Christopher Costelloc, Carryn L. de Moord, Abdelmalek Faraje, Daniel Hivelya, Olaf P. Jensenf, Hiroyuki Kurotag,
L. Richard Littleh, Pamela Macei, Tim McClanahanj, Michael C. Melnychuka, Cóilín Mintok, Giacomo Chato Osiol,m,
Ana M. Parman, Maite Ponsa, Susana Seguradoo, Cody S. Szuwalskic, Jono R. Wilsonc,p, and Yimin Yeq
a
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; bDepartment of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W
2Y2, Canada; cBren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93117; dMarine Resource Assessment and
Management Group, Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Cape Town, 7701 Rondebosch, South Africa; eInstitut National de
Recherche Halieutique, Casablanca, 20100, Morocco; fDepartment of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901; gSeikai
National Fisheries Research Institute, Japan Fisheries Research and Education Agency, Nagasaki-shi, 851-2213 Nagasaki, Japan; hMarine Resources and
Industries Program, CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS 7001, Australia; iFisheries New Zealand, Ministry for Primary Industries, Wellington, 6140,
New Zealand; jGlobal Marine Program, Wildlife Conservation Society, Bronx, NY 10460; kMarine and Freshwater Research Centre, Galway-Mayo Institute of
Technology, Galway, H91 T8NW, Ireland; lUnit D.02 Water and Marine Resources, Directorate D−Sustainable Resources, Joint Research Centre (JRC), European
Commission, 21027 Ispra, Italy; mUnit D.1. Fisheries Conservation and Control in Mediterranean and Black Sea, DG Maritime Affairs and Fisheries, European
Commission, JII-99 02/46, B-1049 Brussels, Belgium; nCentro para el Estudio de Sistemas Marinos, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, U
9120 ACF Puerto Madryn, Chubut, Argentina; oSystems Division, Sustainable Fisheries Partnership, Honolulu, HI 96816; pCalifornia Oceans Program, The Nature
Conservancy, San Francisco, CA 94105; and qFisheries and Aquaculture Department, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 00153 Rome, Italy

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 67.169.173.197 on November 4, 2022 from IP address 67.169.173.197.

Edited by Nils Chr. Stenseth, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, and approved November 15, 2019 (received for review June 12, 2019)

Marine fish stocks are an important part of the world food system
and are particularly important for many of the poorest people of
the world. Most existing analyses suggest overfishing is increasing,
and there is widespread concern that fish stocks are decreasing
throughout most of the world. We assembled trends in abundance
and harvest rate of stocks that are scientifically assessed, constituting half of the reported global marine fish catch. For these stocks, on
average, abundance is increasing and is at proposed target levels.
Compared with regions that are intensively managed, regions with
less-developed fisheries management have, on average, 3-fold
greater harvest rates and half the abundance as assessed stocks.
Available evidence suggests that the regions without assessments
of abundance have little fisheries management, and stocks are in
poor shape. Increased application of area-appropriate fisheries
science recommendations and management tools are still needed
for sustaining fisheries in places where they are lacking.
overfishing

fisheries management biomass targets, most biomass was stable,
with declines occurring in some regions and increases occurring
in others, and that half of the stocks below target abundance had
exploitation rates that would allow rebuilding to the target. They
suggested a potential relationship between fish stock abundance
and management actions. Low stock abundance has 2 major
negative effects: the sustainable yield is lower, so fisheries contribute less to food production and the cost of harvesting often
rises when abundance is low. Low abundance also reduces ecosystem services such as food provisioning to other elements of
Significance
This article compiles estimates of the status of fish stocks from
all available scientific assessments, comprising roughly half of
the world’s fish catch, and shows that, on average, fish stocks
are increasing where they are assessed. We pair this with surveys of the nature and extent of fisheries management systems,
and demonstrate that where fisheries are intensively managed,
the stocks are above target levels or rebuilding. Where fisheries
management is less intense, stock status and trends are worse.
We review evidence on the half of world fisheries that are not
assessed or intensively managed and suggest their status is
much worse than where fisheries are intensively managed.

| harvest impacts | sustainable fisheries

I

n the mid-1970s, national and international efforts to sustain
and rebuild marine fisheries and increase their contribution to
global food security led most coastal states to declare 200-nautical
mile exclusive economic zones. These moves were further incorporated into the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, which came into force after 1994. Through the 1970s and
1980s, it became clear that many fisheries were overcapitalized
and that fish stocks were depleted to low levels (1). Major declines
in a number of fisheries were observed; for example, most of the
herring stocks of the northeast Atlantic had declined markedly or
collapsed during the late 1960s and early 1970s (2, 3). Moreover,
Peruvian anchoveta declined in the 1970s (4), and the Newfoundland cod fishery collapsed (5). These collapses set the stage
for both increased concern about the status of fish stocks and a
wide variety of actions to reverse the declines, including strengthening the legal basis for addressing overfishing in some countries
(6). The intensity and effectiveness of these efforts differs greatly
by region, with some countries failing to reduce overfishing and
others implementing major regulatory changes.
Declines of fish stocks became the subject of high-profile scientific publications, media coverage, and public interest in the
1990s and 2000s, when the global fisheries crisis perception was
established (see, e.g., ref. 7). In response, Worm et al. (8) published a summary of the biomass trends of marine fish stocks from
regions in which scientific data were available up to 2005. The
compilation showed that while two-thirds of stocks were below

2218–2224 | PNAS | January 28, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 4

Author contributions: R.H., R.O.A., C.M.A., J.K.B., T.A.B., C.C., C.L.d.M., A.F., D.H., O.P.J.,
H.K., L.R.L., P.M., T.M., M.C.M., C.M., G.C.O., A.M.P., M.P., S.S., C.S.S., J.R.W., and Y.Y.
designed research; R.H., R.O.A., C.C., D.H., M.C.M., and C.M. analyzed data; R.H., R.O.A.,
C.M.A., J.K.B., T.A.B., C.C., C.L.d.M., A.F., D.H., O.P.J., H.K., L.R.L., P.M., T.M., M.C.M., C.M.,
G.C.O., A.M.P., M.P., S.S., C.S.S., J.R.W., and Y.Y. wrote the paper; and R.H., R.O.A., J.K.B.,
C.L.d.M., A.F., D.H., H.K., L.R.L., P.M., M.C.M., C.M., G.C.O., A.M.P., M.P., and S.S. helped
assemble or provide data.
Competing interest statement: All authors are involved in fisheries management or provide fisheries advice in ways that can be viewed as competing interests. Many are employed by national fisheries agencies or nongovernmental organizations that advocate
for specific fisheries policies. The academic scientists have received funding from sources
that include government fisheries agencies, fishing companies, and environmental
nongovernmental organizations.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialNoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
Data deposition: Code used for analysis is held in the following GitHub repository, https://
github.com/mintoc/pnas_efm_paper.
1

To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: hilbornr@gmail.com.

This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.1909726116/-/DCSupplemental.
First published January 13, 2020.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1909726116

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 67.169.173.197 on November 4, 2022 from IP address 67.169.173.197.

Results
In 2019, the RAM Legacy Stock Assessment Database contained
biomass trends for stocks constituting 49% of the global marine
landings reported to the Food and Agriculture Organization
Hilborn et al.

Fig. 1. Global status of assessed fish and invertebrate stocks. (A) RAM
Legacy Stock Assessment Database Version 4.44 coverage, showing countries
with (pale green) and without (gray) data included. Pies are displayed for
the top 50 countries by catch. Circle area of countries or groups of countries
is proportional to landed tonnage reported to the FAO; dark green shaded
pie areas are proportions of total landings accounted for by stocks in RAM
Legacy Database. (B) State-space model estimates of geometric mean B/BMSY,
U/UMSY and catch/(mean catch) from 1970 to 2016, rescaled to the median in
years of high coverage. All stocks are given equal weight. Circles denote years
1995 and 2005. Shaded regions denote 95% finite population corrected confidence bounds. (C) Status of individual stocks in their latest year of assessment. Circle areas represent estimated MSY of the stock. Circles shaded green
use reference points from stock assessments; circles shaded orange use reference points estimated from biomass dynamics model fits. Overlaid symbols
show bivariate summary statistics across stocks: median (+), geometric mean
with equal weighting (*), and geometric mean weighted by MSY (X).

(FAO) between 1990 and 2005 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Most of
the catch in North and South America, Europe, Japan, Russia,
Northwest Africa, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and
RFMO-managed tuna fisheries are included in the database
(Fig. 1A). With the exception of the major tuna stocks and the
catch locations listed here, we have no assessments from South
and Southeast Asia, China, the Middle East, Central/Eastern
Africa, or Central America in the database. Even for regions
where almost all catches are represented in the database, the
coverage is much better for large, commercially important
stocks, and many small stocks remain unassessed, mirroring the
findings from a detailed analysis of US fisheries (17).
Among the assessed stocks in the database, the average fishing
pressure increased and the biomass declined on average until
1995, when fishing pressure began to decrease. By 2005, average
biomass had started to increase (Fig. 1B). Averaged across all
stocks in the database, biomass in 2016 was higher than BMSY,
and fishing pressure was lower than UMSY. However, improvement is still needed for 24% of stocks, accounting for 19% of
potential catch, which still have low biomass and high fishing
pressure compared with MSY-based targets (upper left quadrant
of Fig. 1C). The stocks of least concern are in the lower right
quadrant, where fishing pressure is below UMSY and biomass is
greater than BMSY; 47% of stocks constituting 52% of potential
catch are in this quadrant. The lower left quadrant is where
fishing pressure is low and stocks are expected to rebuild, and
PNAS | January 28, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 4 | 2219

POPULATION
BIOLOGY

the ecosystem, and excessive fishing contributes more to global
CO2 production and has a higher impact on nontarget species.
A frequent criticism of the RAM Legacy Stock Assessment
Database (9) used in the Worm et al. analysis was that most of
the 166 stocks came from North America, Europe, South Africa,
Australia, and New Zealand, representing only 20% of the beststudied marine fish catch. Thus, a global assessment required
updating the RAM Legacy Database to include more countries
and stocks. Here we report on the efforts to update and expand
the database, which currently includes 882 stocks (635 of which
have estimates of biomass or fishing pressure relative to biological reference points such as those based on maximum sustainable yield [MSY] or other management targets) and covers
new major stocks in Peru, Chile, Japan, Russia, the Mediterranean and Black Sea, and Northwest Africa (SI Appendix, Fig.
S1). Therefore, we can now evaluate the status (as of 2016) of a
much broader range of fisheries and can determine trends in
fishing pressure and abundance. We can then use the status and
trends to evaluate the impact of fisheries management actions
across a broader range of regions and circumstances.
Because the major concern has been about stocks at low
abundance, many management actions have been aimed at rebuilding overfished stocks. An earlier version of this database
was used by Neubauer et al. (10) to explore whether depleted
marine fish stocks could recover to the level of having a biomass
that produces the maximum sustainable yield (BMSY). Ten years
was sufficient for recovery among the 153 overfished stocks
(those depleted below 0.5 BMSY), but not for stocks driven to
collapse (below 0.2 BMSY), which had longer and more variable
recovery times.
To relate stock status to fisheries management, we combined
the RAM Legacy data with data from Melnychuk et al. (11), who
surveyed the nature and intensity of fisheries management in 29
major fishing countries of the world, collecting responses to 46
specific questions for 632 individual stocks. These questions related to research, management, enforcement, and socioeconomic
issues, as well as qualitative indicators of stock status. Countries
differed greatly in the intensity of fisheries management, and this
study showed that expert opinion on stock status was closely
related to the intensity of fisheries management. Pons et al. (12)
conducted a similar survey of international tuna management
organizations, and further data for 36 additional countries have
recently been collected, yielding, in total, data for 1,063 stocks
from 70 countries or regional fisheries management organizations (RFMOs). We have an extensive data set of how fisheries
are managed from all major fishing regions of the world (as of
2016), but lack stock abundance and exploitation rate estimates
for most fisheries in South and Southeast Asia (Fig. 1A).
The classic theory of fishing (13, 14) holds that the biomass of
fish stocks primarily depends on fishing pressure; for stocks to be
at or above the abundance that would produce MSY (BMSY),
fishing pressure or mortality (U) must be reduced to UMSY. Although there is no denying that harvest affects abundance, recent
work has shown that recruitment to the fishery often depends
very little on the abundance of the fish stock (15), and may be
largely determined by periodic environmental regimes (16). We
queried the empirical data on stock status, fishing pressure, and
management to identify regional differences in trends and to test
specific hypotheses: Does the status of stocks depend on fishing
pressure? Do regions with more intensive fisheries management
have lower fishing pressure and better stock status? We then
used these results to estimate how much potential yield is being
lost because of current fishing pressure and stock abundance.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 67.169.173.197 on November 4, 2022 from IP address 67.169.173.197.

contains 19% of stocks constituting 15% of potential catch; 10%
of stocks constituting 14% of potential catch are in the upper
right quadrant, where both abundance and fishing pressure are
above MSY targets. There is no relationship between the size of
the stock (average catch or estimated MSY) and the B/BMSY.
If stocks were consistently managed at exactly UMSY, we would
expect half the stocks to be above BMSY and half below. Allowing
for management imprecision, we expect half the stocks to be
above UMSY and half below. Thus, the assertion that 41% of
stocks being below BMSY (upper left and lower left quadrants) is
an indication of failed fisheries management is incorrect. For this
reason, government agencies typically define “overfished” as a
level significantly below BMSY (e.g., <0.5 BMSY or <0.8 BMSY). It
should be noted, however, that the “overfished” level is well above
the stock size at which the survival of the stock is threatened.
Since the mid-1990s, catch has generally declined in proportion to decreases in fishing pressure and was, in 2016, at 54% of
where it was in 1989 for assessed stocks (Fig. 1B). This pattern is
also observed at the regional level, where the correlation between exploitation rate and catch is generally >0.8 (Fig. 2).
Global catch as reported by the FAO also declined during that
period, but less so than for the assessed stocks reported here, likely
because fishing effort in the parts of the world without assessment
has not declined (18).
Striking regional differences in fishing pressure were identified
(Fig. 2). With the exception of the Mediterranean and NW Africa,
fishing pressure in 2016 was lower than target levels. Tuna fisheries in the Pacific and Indian Oceans were largely unexploited in

1970, but by 2016, fishing pressure increased toward MSY levels.
In the United States, Alaska has consistently maintained a low
fishing pressure. Most regions have some stocks with abundance
below targets, fishing pressure above targets, or both (SI Appendix,
Figs. S2, S3, and S6).
There are also large differences in the extent of decrease in
biomass since 1970 (Fig. 2). Where the biomass trajectories start
near or above twice BMSY, it simply means that most of the fisheries in these areas were previously relatively unfished, and
therefore declined by necessity as fishing intensified and stock
productivity increased (sustainable yield is typically maximized
when the stock abundance is between 30% and 50% of the unfished
abundance). For areas with relatively little decrease, this phase
of fishing had generally been completed much earlier.
Regions that have average biomass near or above BMSY are
Australia, Atlantic Ocean tunas, Canada West Coast, European
Union non-Mediterranean, Indian Ocean tunas, Norway/Iceland/
Faroes, New Zealand, Pacific Ocean tunas, Alaska, the US
Southeast and Gulf, and the US West Coast. Although these regions have not avoided the overfishing of all stocks, conservative
management has kept most stocks at high biomass. Many areas
where biomass was below BMSY in 2000 have seen reductions in
fishing pressure and stock increases, including the Atlantic Ocean
tunas; the East, Southeast, and Gulf coasts of the United States;
the Canada East Coast; and the Northwest Pacific Ocean (Japan
and Russia). Tuna stocks in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, which
were well above BMSY in 1970, were near BMSY in 2016.

Fig. 2. State-space model estimates of geometric mean (rescaled to the median in years of high coverage) biomass relative to BMSY (orange), fishing pressure
(green) relative to UMSY, and catch relative to mean catch (purple), for assessed stocks in contrasting regions. (A–R) Stocks are equally weighted. Circles denote
years 1995 and 2005. Shaded regions denote 95% finite population-corrected confidence bounds; in years when all stocks are assessed, there is no uncertainty
considered. Panels are sorted according to mean U/UMSY in 2010 (highest in A, lowest in R).

2220 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1909726116

Hilborn et al.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 67.169.173.197 on November 4, 2022 from IP address 67.169.173.197.

fishing pressure significantly affects the rate of change of population
biomass.
Worm et al. predicted that stocks that were overfished should
recover if fishing pressure was reduced below UMSY. To test this,
we examined the 47 individual stocks that were overfished (<0.5
BMSY) in 2006 but have had mean fishing pressures below UMSY
since then. Of those stocks, 78% have increased since 2006,
supporting the view that reducing fishing pressure promotes
stock rebuilding. However, if the criterion for success was not
just increasing biomass but also rebuilding the biomass to target
levels, then most stocks fail to meet the criterion; only 47% of
the overfished stocks had increased to above 0.5 BMSY, and only
15% had been rebuilt to above BMSY in the year of their most
recent assessment. The record of success is therefore mixed;
most stocks subjected to low fishing pressure are rebuilding, but
the 6 to 8 y documented in our data since 2006 have not been
sufficient to see most stocks reach their fisheries management
targets (which may not be BMSY). To some extent, complete rebuilding is a matter of rates and times; to rebuild from 0.5 BMSY to
BMSY in 8 years would require an annual rate of increase of 9%,
but these stocks actually increased by an average of just 5%.
If we examine what has happened to overfished stocks since
2000, we have many more stocks to examine. Rates of biomass
increase (Bt+1/Bt) for stocks overfished (<0.5 BMSY) in 2000 were
highly variable, but depended on how depleted the stocks were
and the average fishing pressure since 2000 (Fig. 3B and SI
Appendix, Table S2). Stocks that had high fishing pressure and
high biomass were the least likely to increase. For these stocks,
both the fishing pressure and stock abundance were significant

Fig. 3. (A) Fraction of stocks that increased in abundance given a stock was at a specific value of B/BMSY (x axis) and U/UMSY (y axis) in the preceding year. The
black solid line represents the combinations of B/BMSY and U/UMSY for which the population is predicted to remain stable (13) under a Pella-Tomlinson stockproduction model. At all combinations below or left of the line, the population should increase; at all combinations above and to the right, the population
should decline; and near the line, populations should have an equal probability of increase or decrease. All stocks and years in which B/BMSY and U/UMSY were
available from assessments or from biomass dynamics model fits were used to calculate fractions of increase (dark red means 0% of the stocks increased in
biomass, dark blue means 100% of the stocks increased in biomass). (B) The relationship between annual rate of increase in biomass since 2000 (y axis) and
average annual exploitation rate since 2000 (x axis, shown on a square root scale) for the 115 stocks that were below 0.5 BMSY in 2000. Gray line is a loess
smoother fit to the data. Circle area is proportional to MSY. (C) Rate of biomass increase for regions with more than 5 stocks below 0.5 BMSY in 2000. Small
hatch marks indicate individual stocks, violin plots show overall distributions, and large hatch marks denote regional means.

Hilborn et al.

PNAS | January 28, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 4 | 2221

POPULATION
BIOLOGY

Stocks in the Mediterranean-Black Sea have low biomass and
continue to decline, whereas stocks in South America have declined considerably in the last 20 y and were below target levels
in 2016. Fishing pressure in South America has been dropping
since the early 2000s. Only 4 of 36 stocks in NW Africa have
MSY-based reference points for biomass estimated, all of which
are large-volume, small-pelagic fisheries and are therefore unrepresentative of the many demersal fisheries in the region. The
stock abundance for those small-pelagic stocks is above MSY
targets, but exploitation rates were high (2.5 times UMSY) for the
6 NW African stocks for which exploitation rate reference points
exist. Regional assessments (19) estimated that most demersal
stocks were overexploited by 2008 and recommended reductions
in fishing pressure.
A total of 19% of stocks can be considered to be poised to
recover from low biomass (<BMSY) because they have low fishing
pressure (lower left quadrant in Fig. 1C), while other stocks would
be expected to decline rapidly from higher biomass (>BMSY) because of high fishing pressure (upper right quadrant of Fig. 1C).
These theoretical expectations can be tested with empirical data
by examining how stocks responded in the past. Using data from
all years and stocks, the proportion of stocks that have actually
increased at different combinations of biomass and fishing pressure support the basic theory that when both biomass and fishing
pressure are low, stocks are likely to increase (Fig. 3A), while for
any biomass level, the probability of biomass increase is higher at
lower fishing pressure. Fig. 3B shows the relationship between
fishing pressure and rate of increase after 2000 for stocks below
0.5 BMSY in 2000. Both Fig. 3 A and B show that the level of

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 67.169.173.197 on November 4, 2022 from IP address 67.169.173.197.

(P < 0.05) predictors of rate of increase, but there was no relationship between the number of years a stock had been below
0.5 BMSY and the rate of increase. Furthermore, rates of increase
among the stocks overfished in 2000 differed considerably within
and between regions (Fig. 3C).
We quantified the association among regional mean U/UMSY,
regional mean B/BMSY, and management intensity in the same
regions or countries (Fig. 4). Regional estimated fishing intensity
(U/UMSY) in 2016 or the last year estimated (SI Appendix, Fig.
S3) was negatively correlated with management intensity (Fig. 4;
r = −0.60). The 2 regions with particularly high recent mean
U/UMSY (Mediterranean and Northwest Africa) had among the
lowest fishery management index (FMI) scores for management
and enforcement. Regions with higher FMI levels of management and enforcement had mean U/UMSY at or below target levels.
The relationship between B/BMSY and FMI is even clearer, with
B/BMSY much higher for regions with high levels of management.
Potential yields can be calculated by comparing the long-term
average catch at the current fishing pressure to the long-term
catch if all stocks were fished at UMSY. Similarly, one can compare
the potential yield lost at current biomass to what would happen if
all stocks were at BMSY. Stocks that are fished too hard (U >

Fig. 4. Relationship between regional geometric mean (rescaled to the
median in years of high coverage) (A) U/UMSY and (B) B/BMSY and the joint
management and enforcement scores for FMI surveys in corresponding regions. Blue points represent tuna fisheries from the Atlantic, Pacific, and
Indian Oceans, and red points represent other regions shown in Fig. 2. Solid
gray line is a linear fit to the data plotted in red. Dotted gray lines mark
where U/UMSY or B/BMSY = 1 and where the best fit line intersects with
U/UMSY or B/BMSY = 1. Abbreviations for regions are as follows: Atl tuna, Atlantic
Ocean tunas; Ind tuna, Indian Ocean tunas; Pac tuna, Pacific Ocean tunas; AUS,
Australia; E CAN, Canada East; W CAN, Canada West; EU non Med, EU nonMediterranean; JPN, Japan; Med, Mediterranean; NZ, New Zealand; Nor, Ice,
Faroe, Norway, Iceland, and Faroe Islands; NW AFR, NW Africa; RUS, Russia; SA,
South Africa; S Amer, South America; US AK, US Alaska; USNE, US North East;
US S&G, US Southeast and Gulf; USWC, US West Coast.

2222 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1909726116

UMSY) result in lost yield from overfishing, and potential yield is
lost for stocks at biomass below BMSY. These theoretical calculations likely overestimate the loss because it is not possible to selectively fish each stock at its optimum rate, because social objectives
may involve minimizing environmental impacts or maximizing
profits and jobs instead of optimizing biological yield (20, 21), and
because trophic interactions make single-species calculation of
MSY often unobtainable. Overall, we estimate that from 3% to
5% of potential yield is lost by excess fishing pressure and 24% to
28% is lost by biomass being below BMSY (SI Appendix, Supplemental Methods and Table S3). This difference is a result of the
time lag between reduction in fishing pressure and the rebuilding
of abundance, and even when fishing effort is perfectly managed,
some stocks would be below BMSY because of random fluctuations.
Discussion
We found a clear relationship between fishing pressure and
changes in stock abundance, as well as between management intensity and fishing pressure. We have also estimated that excess
fishing pressure now accounts for about 3% to 5% loss of potential
yield from the stocks constituting half of world marine catch. In a
number of countries, the decline in fishing pressure can be directly
tied to changes in legislation and subsequent management. The
1996 revisions of the Magnuson-Stevens Act in the United States
required the development of rebuilding plans and catch limits,
resulting in a sharp reduction in fishing pressure on overfished
stocks (22). The Common Fisheries Policy in Atlantic Europe was
similarly reformed in 2002. In eastern Canada and the eastern
United States, there was a major reduction in fishing pressure in
the 1990s after the collapse of groundfish stocks, notably, Newfoundland cod; however, in both places, many stocks have failed to
rebuild and remain at low abundance. In Japan, caps on total allowable catches (TACs) were introduced for several species in
1997, and thereafter the fishing pressure for TAC-managed stocks
decreased more rapidly than for other stocks (23). New Zealand
enacted harvest strategy standards in 2008, and Chile instituted a
major legal reform in 2013. As a consequence, the concern about
overfishing has resulted in legal and enforcement responses in
many countries with strong management institutions.
Our analysis of fisheries stock status from scientific assessments is based on 5 times as many stocks and 2 and a half times
as much catch as previously published by Worm et al. in 2009.
This includes regions such as the Mediterranean and northwest
Africa, which have not been included in previous summaries, and
the assessments of South American stocks are far more extensive. Our analyses thus represent the most comprehensive investigation of status based on scientific assessments to date.
With the exception of the tuna RFMO regions, intense fisheries management (as reflected by high FMI scores) is associated
with low values of U/UMSY. The tuna RFMOs have much lower
U/UMSY than one would expect based on their FMI scores. This
may be because of the cost of fishing the tunas, which is much
higher than continental shelf fisheries. Weak fisheries management in the tuna fisheries should lead the fisheries to be at or
near bionomic equilibrium, which, given the high cost of tuna
fishing, should be at a lower U/UMSY than we would expect in
coastal fisheries. Given the subsidies that are in place in several
countries for tuna fisheries (24), we would expect fishing pressure to be higher than the true bionomic equilibrium. More detailed analysis of tuna fisheries (12) has suggested that the status of
tuna stocks is primarily influenced by factors other than the fisheries management system, including life-history and market factors.
The latest FAO “State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture”
report (25) indicates that the fraction of overfished stocks has
increased since 2000 (from 27% to 33%), while this study suggests
that abundance of stocks is increasing. This probably reflects the
bias arising from the fact that the RAM Legacy Database only
includes stocks with reliable quantitative stock assessments that
Hilborn et al.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 67.169.173.197 on November 4, 2022 from IP address 67.169.173.197.

1. D. Ludwig, R. Hilborn, C. Walters, Uncertainty, resource exploitation, and conservation:
Lessons from history. Science 260, 17–36 (1993).
2. G. Sætersdal, A review of past management of some pelagic stocks and its effectiveness. Rapp. P. V. Reun. Cons. Int. Explor. Mer. 177, 505–512 (1980).
3. M. Dickey-Collas et al., Lessons learned from stock collapse and recovery of North Sea
herring: A review. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 67, 1875–1886 (2010).
4. M. H. Glantz, Science, politics and economics of the Peruvian anchoveta fishery.
Marine Policy 3, 201–210 (1979).
5. A. Hutchings, R. Myers, What can be learned from the collapse of a renewable resource?
Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua, of Newfoundland and labrador. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 51,
2126–2146 (1994).
6. M. M. Sissenwine, P. M. Mace, H. J. Lassen, Preventing overfishing: Evolving approaches and emerging challenges. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 71, 153–156 (2014).
7. J. B. C. Jackson, Colloquium paper: Ecological extinction and evolution in the
brave new ocean. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105 (suppl. 1), 11458–11465
(2008).
8. B. Worm et al., Rebuilding global fisheries. Science 325, 578–585 (2009).

Hilborn et al.

Finally, we need to understand how to use management approaches
that leverage healthy stocks into sustainable economic and social
benefits for the fishing industry and fishing communities. This article has only explored the biological status of fish stocks, and not
the social and economic sustainability of the fisheries.
Our analysis has concentrated on single-species status relative
to MSY reference points. The status of stocks can also be judged
against economic or ecosystem reference points, and most definitions of “sustainable” include ecosystem elements. We have
made no attempt to identify those reference points or compare
stock abundance to them. However, under both economic or
ecosystem views, the biomass reference point would generally be
higher and the exploitation rate reference point lower than a MSYbased reference point, so the increasing overall trend in biomass
and decreasing exploitation rate points to better performance by
these other metrics. Climate change will bring new challenges, as
we expect productivity of individual stocks will change and reference points will need to be adjusted.
As most unassessed fisheries are in tropical and subtropical
regions dominated by highly diverse mixed fisheries, the singlestock assessment and management practices used in temperate
countries are impractical. Regulating the overall fishing pressure
so that the ecosystem-wide benefits are optimized and moving to
cooperative rather than competitive fisheries seem most likely to
provide for biological, social, and economic sustainability (34).
The efforts of the thousands of managers, scientists, fishers,
and nongovernmental organization workers have resulted in significantly improved statuses of fisheries in much of the developed
world, and increasingly in the developing world. Scientifically
managed and assessed fish stocks in many places are increasing, or
are already at or above the levels that will provide a sustainable
long-term catch. The major challenge now is to bring fisheries
science methods and sustainability to fisheries that remain largely
unassessed and unmanaged.
Methods
All data used in this analysis are available at www.ramlegacy.org version 4.44
and the associated Zenodo repository. Calculations that were performed or
statistical tests are described in SI Appendix. Code used for analysis is held in
the following Github repository: https://github.com/mintoc/pnas_efm_paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Cole Monnahan and Sean Anderson for
assistance with the figures, and Nicole Baker for editing and formatting. We
thank all contributors to the RAM Legacy Stock Assessment Database (https://
www.ramlegacy.org/) and all the authors of the assessments used in our analysis, which were performed by national and international fisheries agencies independent of this paper. We thank all respondents of FMI expert surveys, and thank
Charmane Ashbrook for assisting with data collection for recent FMI surveys. This
paper is a product of a Science for Nature and People Partnership working group at
the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, funded by The Nature
Conservancy and The Wildlife Conservation Society. The funding for some of the
coauthors came from grants from the Walton Family Foundation, the Environmental Defense Fund, and donations from 12 fishing companies. T.A.B. was
funded in part by the Richard C. and Lois M. Worthington Endowed Professorship
in Fisheries Management.

9. D. Ricard, C. Minto, O. P. Jensen, J. K. Baum, Examining the knowledge base and status
of commercially exploited marine species with the RAM Legacy Stock Assessment Database. Fish Fish. 13, 380–398 (2012).
10. P. Neubauer, O. P. Jensen, J. A. Hutchings, J. K. Baum, Resilience and recovery of
overexploited marine populations. Science 340, 347–349 (2013).
11. M. C. Melnychuk, E. Peterson, M. Elliott, R. Hilborn, Fisheries management impacts on
target species status. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 178–183 (2017).
12. M. Pons, M. C. Melnychuk, R. Hilborn, Management effectiveness of large pelagic
fisheries in the high seas. Fish Fish. 75, 642–652 (2017).
13. R. J. H. Beverton, S. J. Holt, On the Dynamics of Exploited Fish Populations (Chapman
and Hall, London, 1957), pp. 533.
14. W. E. Ricker, Handbook of Computations for Biological Statistics of Fish Populations
(Queen’s Printer and Controller of Stationary, Ottawa, 1958), pp. 300.
15. C. S. Szuwalski, J. T. Thorson, Global fishery dynamics are poorly predicted by classical
models. Fish Fish. 18, 1085–1095 (2017).
16. K. A. Vert-pre, R. O. Amoroso, O. P. Jensen, R. Hilborn, Frequency and intensity of
productivity regime shifts in marine fish stocks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 1779–
1784 (2013).

PNAS | January 28, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 4 | 2223

POPULATION
BIOLOGY

come from countries or organizations that perform reliable scientific assessments of their stocks and constitute only half of the
world’s catch. We have much less reliable information on the
status and trends of the other half of global marine fish stocks,
but the intensity of fisheries management is low in these regions,
and expert opinion is that the status of these stocks is likely poor
and often declining (11). Average FMI management and enforcement scores for South and Southeast Asian countries were
well below 0.4 (compared with the most intensively managed
regions with scores > 0.9), suggesting that the average B/BMSY is
less than 0.5 and the average U/UMSY is greater than 1.5 (Fig. 4).
Fisheries in data-limited regions are an important part of food
security for many of the poorest people in the world and constitute
something of an enigma. Costello et al. (26) used methods relying
on reported catches as the primary indicator of stock status, which
have often increased in these regions, suggesting that the stocks are
reasonably healthy; for example, the average B/BMSY was reported
as 1.16 in China, 1.08 in Indonesia, 0.90 in the Republic of Korea,
and 1.94 in Bangladesh. Similarly, Rosenberg et al. (27) used an
ensemble of 4 catch-driven methods, which also suggested that most
stocks in South and Southeast Asia were close to BMSY. Local experts, in contrast, have widespread concerns about the poor status
of stocks in these countries (11, 28) and believe that methods that
rely primarily on trends in catches fail to capture these concerns.
Similarly, data from East Africa also generally indicate poor
stock status (29). Part of the reason that Asian fisheries have
continued to have high catches may be the ecosystem effect of
reducing the biomass of large predatory species, allowing smaller,
faster-growing species to become more productive, as well as enabling some key species to change their life-history and mature at
younger ages (30). Alternatively, higher catches could reflect more
comprehensive infrastructure development and improved reporting practices. In addition, we have almost no assessments of the
status of freshwater fisheries (31) and relatively few for small-scale
fisheries (32), such as those in coral reef and mangrove habitats,
many of which are vital for some of the poorest people in the
world. Recreational fisheries also may be data poor and unmanaged (33). Understanding the status and management of these
fisheries should be a high priority.
We have shown that in regions where fisheries are intensively
managed, stock abundance is generally improving or remaining near
fisheries management target levels, and the common narrative that
fish stocks are declining worldwide will depend on the spatial and
temporal window of the assessment. The critical question is what
methods will best help improve the status of stocks in places where
stocks are currently in poor condition. To do this, we need to understand what methods of management have worked in what social,
economic, political, and biological contexts; understand why some
stocks have improved much faster than others after a reduction in
fishing pressure; and learn how to identify and implement the most
appropriate forms of fisheries assessment, management, and enforcement in countries and regions where they are currently limited.

25. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “The State of World Fisheries
and Aquaculture 2018 - Meeting the sustainable development goals” (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, 2018).
26. C. Costello et al., Global fishery prospects under contrasting management regimes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 5125–5129 (2016).
27. A. A. Rosenberg et al., Applying a new ensemble approach to estimating stock status
of marine fisheries around the world. Conserv. Lett. 11, 1–9 (2018).
28. J. L. Anderson et al., The fishery performance indicators: A management tool for
triple bottom line outcomes. PLoS One 10, e0122809 (2015).
29. B. Kaunda-Arara et al., Spatial variation in benthopelagic fish assemblage structure along
coastal East Africa from recent bottom trawl surveys. Reg. Stud. Mar. Sci. 8, 201–209 (2016).
30. C. S. Szuwalski, M. G. Burgess, C. Costello, S. D. Gaines, High fishery catches through
trophic cascades in China. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 717–721 (2017).
31. A. M. Deines et al., The contribution of lakes to global inland fisheries harvest. Front.
Ecol. Environ. 15, 293–298 (2017).
32. R. Chuenpagdee, “Too big to ignore: Global research network for the future of smallscale fisheries” in World Small-Scale Fisheries Contemporary Visions, R. Chuenpagdee,
Ed. (Eburon Academic Publishers, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2011), pp. 383–394.
33. R. Arlinghaus et al., Opinion: Governing the recreational dimension of global fisheries. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 5209–5213 (2019).
34. C. M. Anderson et al., How commercial fishing effort is managed. Fish Fish. 25, 333 (2018).

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 67.169.173.197 on November 4, 2022 from IP address 67.169.173.197.

17. P. Neubauer, J. T. Thorson, M. C. Melnychuk, R. Methot, K. Blackhart, Drivers and rates
of stock assessments in the United States. PLoS One 13, e0196483 (2018).
18. Y. Rousseau, R. A. Watson, J. L. Blanchard, E. A. Fulton, Evolution of global marine
fishing fleets and the response of fished resources. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116,
12238–12243 (2019).
19. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “Report of the FAO/CECAF
Working Group on the Assessment of Demersal Resources – Subgroup South Freetown,
Sierra Leone, 9–18 October 2008” (CECAF/ECAF SERIES 11/73, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Rome, 2012), p. 328.
20. W. E. Ricker, Maximum sustained yields from fluctuating environments and mixed
stocks. J. Fish. Res. Board Can. 15, 991–1006 (1958).
21. R. Hilborn, I. J. Stewart, T. A. Branch, O. P. Jensen, Defining trade-offs among conservation of species diversity abundances, profitability, and food security in the California Current bottom- trawl fishery. Conserv. Biol. 26, 257–266 (2012).
22. N. R. Council, Evaluating the Effectiveness of Fish Stock Rebuilding Plans in the United
States (National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2014).
23. M. Ichinokawa, H. Okamura, H. Kurota, The status of Japanese fisheries relative to
fisheries around the world. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 74, 1277–1287 (2017).
24. U. R. Sumaila, A. Dyck, A. Baske, Subsidies to tuna fisheries in the Western Central
Pacific Ocean. Mar. Policy 43, 288–294 (2014).

2224 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1909726116

Hilborn et al.

