When a society’s resources and outputs are allocated in such a way that no
feasible change can improve anyone’s welfare without reducing the welfare of at least
one other person, then a Pareto optimum exists (named after Vilfredo Pareto, Italian
economist and mathematician, 1848–1923). A reallocation that makes one person
better off without making anyone else worse off is called a Pareto improvement. From
our analysis it should be clear that open access harvesting is not Pareto optimal. By
reducing effort from E ∞ to E MEY , as shown in figure 3.1, society saves on some factors
of production that can be used in other sectors of the economy. This saving of
resources should make it possible for the society to realise a Pareto improvement.
Note that this criterion is rather strict, requiring that the improvement should take
place “without making anyone else worse off”. However, economic development
often takes place with net gains for someone, but losses for others. Even if total gains
are larger than total losses in monetary terms, such a change is not a Pareto
improvement because of the losses for someone. The Kaldor-Hicks criterion says that
if a change in the economy is such that the gainers could compensate the loosers and
still be better off, this change is beneficial for the society as a whole (J. R. Hicks and
N. Kaldor published their work in 1939 in the Economic Journal). Compensation is
hypothetical and this criterion suggests that the change is preferable even if
compensation does not actually take place.

3.3 Effort and harvest taxes
In the previous section we have seen that a fishery can provide an economic surplus,
resource rent, if effort is reduced below the open access level. We also derived the
effort level E MEY that maximises resource rent. Using the sustainable yield curve, H(E)
in figure 2.3, what the rent maximising harvest, H MEY , is follows immediately. The
analysis so far does not tell how the reduction in E could take place. In many
countries regulation traditionally plays a key role in managing fishing capacity and
effort. We may think of capacity in numbers and size of vessels whereas effort is
related to use of vessels in fishing. Examples of management instruments for capacity
and effort reductions include vessel and fisher licences, effort quotas, length and
weight limits for hull and fitted vessels, as well as engine power limitations. Such
regulations are called input regulations. Output regulations related to the harvest of
34

fish are called quotas – be it total harvest quotas or harvest quotas per enterprise,
vessel or fisher. In addition, input and output regulations may be combined with
technical regulations, which include minimum mesh size of gear, minimum size of
fish, and closed areas and seasons. Some of the regulatory instruments may be
transformed into market instruments, such as tradeable licences and quotas (more on
this in the next section).

Indirect management instruments include taxes, fees and subsidies. The latter,
for example a fuel subsidy, would encourage an expansion of effort and can be
disregarded as an instrument to reduce effort in the direction of E MEY . In other parts of
the economy corrective taxes are used to discourage the use of some goods and
services, for example, motor vehicle fuel and tobacco, and to finance government
budgets. Corrective taxes can in theory bring marginal private costs into alignment
with marginal social costs. Such instruments are called Pigouvian taxes (after the
British economist A. C. Pigou, 1877–1959). In principle, these could be used in
fisheries, even though in practical fisheries policy they are hardly the regulatory
means of primary choice among major fishing nations (see, for example, OECD,
1997). Nevertheless, studying the effects of Pigouvian taxes on fishing effort, as well
as on resources, is an excellent point of departure for studies in fisheries management
– and to gain a basic grasp on how economic instruments work. Therefore, let us have
a closer look at the effects of taxes on effort and harvest.

We have seen in sections 3.1 and 3.2 that a renewable resource like fish is
economically overexploited under an open access regime, provided the market price is
high enough and the harvest cost low enough to make it a commercial resource.
Another interpretation is that the bioeconomic model predicts that open access
fisheries, in the long run, will not generate resource rent. Figure 3.1 shows that the
average revenue per unit effort, AR(E), is greater than the marginal cost of effort,
MC(E) if total participation in the fishery, measured by E, is less than E ∞ . The
existence of a super-normal profit for the participants attracts new fishers with the
result that total effort increases. This will take place as long as E is less than E ∞ . On
the other hand, if effort at the point of departure for our analysis is greater than E ∞
fishers will have higher costs than revenues and some of them will leave this fishery.

35

Thus, E ∞ is the open access equilibrium level for effort as long as prices and costs are
constant, and to this effort corresponds an open access equilibrium level of the fish
stock.

In public discourse “the tragedy of the commons” seems to have several
meanings, including that effort is higher than the maximum sustainable yield effort,
effort is higher than the maximum economic yield effort, stock level is lower than the
maximum sustainable yield stock and that sustainable yield is lower than maximum
sustainable yield. It is, however, important to distinguish between “tragedies” related
to biological concepts and to economic concepts. A fish stock that is economically
over-fished, as is always the case at open access equilibrium, is not necessarily
biologically over-fished. If fishing costs are high and/or fish price is low, open access
does not necessarily attract enough effort to cause biological over-fishing. The
equilibrium effort has to be higher than the maximum sustainable yield effort to cause
biological over fishing, and this will not happen unless the effort cost is sufficiently
low and/or the fish price is high enough.

Based on the analysis above it is now clear that the management board should
aim at doing something with the prices, costs or institutions that fishermen face. For
fishermen high fish prices may be good in the short run, but with bad institutions
(open access) this may in the long run be a threat against fish stocks. Using Pigouvian
taxes, the manager’s task is to find the tax rate, on either effort or harvest, that adjusts
effort to the maximum economic yield level E MEY . This requires an extensive
knowledge about the biological and economic characteristics of the fishery, expressed
in the H(E), TR(E) and TC(E) functions. However, any tax rate lower than the optimal
one will move the fishery in the right direction, from E ∞ towards E MEY . Let us now
assume that the manager has all the necessary information freely available so that we
do not have to include information and management costs in the analysis. Panel (a) of
figure 3.2 shows total revenues and costs, whereas panel (b) shows average and
marginal figures.

The following symbols will be used:

36

t E = tax per unit effort (for example, $ per trawl hour or trawler year)
t H = tax per unit harvest (for example, $ per kg or tonne of fish landed).
With an effort tax the total cost for the fishers is

(3.14)

TC P ( E ) = (a + t E ) E ,

Figure 3.2. Use of corrective (Pigouvian) taxes on effort and harvest can equate
social and private costs and social and private revenues.
where E and a are effort and cost per unit of effort, respectively. The use of subscript
p for TC underlines that this is the total private cost of the fishers, including what they
have to pay in effort taxes to the government. Note that for any value of E total
private cost TC p is greater than the total cost, TC, since fishers have to include the
effort tax in their costs. The effect of an effort tax can be analysed equivalent to a shift
in the cost per unit effort, thus increasing the slope of the total cost curve for the
industry. This is shown in figure 3.2, where TC(E) is the total cost curve exclusive of
the effort tax and TC p (E) is the total cost curve including the tax. The effect of the
37

effort tax is to augment total private costs to such a level that the TC p curve intersects
the total revenue curve for the maximum sustainable yield effort level E MEY . This
implies that the total revenue, TR(E), is shared between the government, as the tax
collector, and the fishing industry. The former receives the resource rent, π MEY , and
the fishers end up with the difference between the total revenue and the resource rent,
TR(E) minus π MEY . Fishers in total receive TR(E) for their catch, and out of this they
pay a tax proportionate to their effort. What is left is just enough to cover the costs of
the fishers. Recall that ordinary remuneration of capital and labour is included in the
costs.

The total amount of resource rent depends on biological and economic
characteristics of the fishery, related to the forms of the curves in figure 3.2. In
general, we could say that low cost fisheries with high priced and/or easy to catch fish
have the greatest potential for generating resource rent. On the other hand, high cost
fisheries with low priced and/or hard to catch fish may even make it uneconomical to
sustain a fishery on a commercial basis. Realising resource rent has a meaning only
when a fishery generates, or is expected to generate, higher revenues than costs.

With a harvest tax the total private revenue of fishers equals

(3.15)

TR P ( E ) = ( p − t H ) H ( E )

where p and H are the price of fish and of harvest, respectively. Note that TR now has
the subscript p to underline that the total revenue in (3.15) is what the private industry
receives net of taxes. The other part, equal to t h H(E), is the government’s tax revenue.
It is easy to see by re-arranging (3.15) that the total revenue of the fishery, p H (E) ,
equals the sum of private and government revenues. Recall that the tax rate t h is
measured in $ per kg or per tonne – in other words we do not use a percentage tax in
this analysis.

Figure 3.2 panel (b) shows in detail the effects of the two taxes discussed
above. The MC, AR and MR curves are the before-tax fishery marginal cost, average
revenue and marginal revenue, respectively. The open access bioeconomic
equilibrium is at the effort level E ∞ where the fishery marginal cost curve intersects
38

the average revenue curve. In this case with a horizontal MC curve the effort tax shifts
this curve upward to MC p , a distance equal to the size of the tax. If, for example, the
fishery marginal cost is $100 per trawl hour and the effort tax t E also equals $100 per
trawl hour, the fishery marginal cost including the tax will be twice the pre-tax level.
In figure 3.2 panel (b) this is illustrated with a MC p curve at a level twice as high as
the MC curve. The MC p curve intersects the AR curve for an effort level that gives
maximum economic yield, E MEY . The industry now faces the effort cost including the
tax and this will equal average revenue AR at equilibrium. For effort levels lower than
E MEY the AR curve is above the MC P curve. This implies that additional effort will
enter the fishery due to super-normal profit in the industry, and the stock will decline
to reduce the average revenue along the downward sloping AR curve towards the
E MEY level. On the other hand, if effort is above the E MEY level the effort cost
including the tax is above the average revenue curve, imposing a loss on the
participating vessels. This implies that some effort will have to leave the industry,
resulting in lower catch, increased stock level and increased average revenue when
moving from the right along the AR curve towards E MEY . In case of an effort tax as
the only management instrument fishers will face a higher cost of effort, but in all
other respects their adaptation will be as under open access.

In case of a harvest tax, the average and the marginal revenue curves of the
sustainable fishery are affected as shown in figure 3.2 panel (b). If the price of fish is
$2.00 per kg and the harvest tax is $1.00 per kg, the net price of fish received by the
fishers will be $1.00. Whether fishers receive $2.00 per kg and are charged a tax of
$1.00 per kg, or they receive the net price of $1.00 does not make any difference to
their net revenues. In the latter case the $1.00 harvest tax is levied on the buyers who
collect the tax on behalf of the government. With this example the AR p (E) curve has a
slope about half as steep as the AR(E) curve in figure 3.2. This is due to the definition
of average revenue; namely total revenue divided by effort. With a constant price of
fish the numerator of the average revenue will change in proportion with the harvest
tax for a given level of effort. The right-hand side end point of the average revenue
curve on the effort axis will not be affected by the harvest tax; thus the intersection is
at E k for both the AR and the AR P curve.

39

In figure 3.2 the level of the effort tax is such that the linear TC p curve
intersects the total revenue curve for E MEY . This implies that the total tax revenue
equals the resource rent:

(3.16)

π MEY = t E EMEY .

In the case of a harvest tax in figure 3.2 the level of this tax has been set such that the
TR p curve intersects the total cost curve for E MEY . The resource rent in this case is
exactly of the same amount as the tax revenue:

(3.16)

π MEY = t H H MEY .

By use of taxes on effort or harvest, the profit maximising behaviour of fishers results
in lower effort than under open access, and those who stay in the industry earn a
normal remuneration. Open access fisheries give, as we have seen, too many fishers in
the industry, but resource taxes on effort or harvest could positively alter this. Thus, a
tax on harvest contributes to decreasing the total revenue of the industry whereas a tax
on effort contributes to increasing the industry costs. Resource taxes levied on effort
or harvest would change the private cost or private revenue, respectively, to
discourage participation in the fishery. The tax authority, traditionally the central
government, collects the resource rent generated. This tax revenue may be used to
reduce other taxes or to augment the government’s expenditures. From a policy point
of view resource rent can be re-distributed, for example, to fishing communities or
regions, without any efficiency loss. The question of how the resource rent is spent or
re-distributed should be seen independently of the problem of generating the rent.
That is one of the strengths of this analysis. However, in actual commercial fisheries
resource taxes have not been a common management instrument, like in other
environmental and natural resource saving relations (for an overview of
environmentally related taxes in industrialised countries, see OECD, 2001; OECD
2003; and The Environmental Taxes Database of OECD at http://www.oecd.org/).
Also see chapter 11 on what may happen to fisheries dependent regions and countries
if distributional issues are neglected.

40

Management does not come for free. There are costs of research and assessment
of fish stocks and markets, as well as costs of obtaining information on costs and
earnings of fishing vessels. In addition management and enforcement systems are
necessary institutions which need economic funding. In some cases locally limited
ecosystems may be governed more efficient and less costly by fishermen and other
stakeholders themselves (see Ostrom, 1990, which is one of the major works that
gained professor Elinor Ostrom the 2009 Nobel price in economics).

3.4 Fishing licences and quotas
We have seen in the previous section how effort and harvest taxes could be used to
reduce effort down to or towards the long run optimum, the rent maximising level.
How much effort is reduced from the open-access level depends on the size of the tax,
which in this case acts as a price instrument. In simple cases like this, with a single
resource and no distinction between year classes, with one-dimensional effort (no
substitution between inputs), no management costs and no uncertainty, the manager
may choose freely between indirect price instruments (taxes) and direct instruments,
such as effort and harvest quotas. Price management (taxes) and quantity management
(quotas) have equivalent effects on overall industry production and economic
performance, therefore they are called dual instruments. However, to ensure that the
expected results are lasting, the effort quotas and harvest quotas should be transferable.
This means that there has to be a quota market to ensure that at any time the most
cost-effective fishers do the fishing. In a successful MEY-managed fishery resource
rent per unit effort would be Π MEY /E MEY and resource rent per unit harvest would be

Π MEY /H MEY (recall figure 3.2). These two ratios indicate the equilibrium prices of
effort and harvest quotas, respectively.

In actual fisheries the initial distribution of the fishing rights, such as vessel
licences, effort quotas and harvest quotas are often heavily debated. There could be
several reasons for this, but the main one has to do with the distribution of resource
rent, which may be significant in well-managed fisheries. Even in a system with nontransferable harvest and effort quotas, significant resource rent may still be generated,
in particular, if the initial quotas are given for free to those fishers that are most

41

successful under the open access regime. The question is, however, whether these
fishers also in the future will be the most efficient ones.

Let us now have a closer look at the effects of using licences and quotas as
management instruments and compare the results to that of taxes. A vessel licence is a
permission to register and use a vessel for commercial fishing. The licence may or
may not specify limits to the vessel characteristics, for example, length (metres),
weight (gross registered tonnes), hold volume (cubic metres) or engine power (horse
power or kilowatt), and to the type of gear (for example, trawl, long-line or purse
seine). A licence usually restricts the fishing capacity of the vessel; in general
capacity is the amount of fish that can be produced per unit of time, for example, per
year, with existing vessel, equipment and gear at a given stock level, provided the
availability of variable factors of production is not restricted. 1 While capacity is
related to the mere existence of the fishing vessel, effort is related to its use, measured
for example, in hours, days or years. What to use as the unit of effort is mainly a
question of convenience (see Box 3.1). In what follows we shall focus on effort and
harvest quotas as management tools without discussing explicitly the use of licences.
However, there is a close connection between the licence value and the quota value,
depending on the amount of harvest quotas or effort quotas a licence holder is given
or allowed to acquire.

Figure 3.3 is derived from figure 3.2 and shows effort along the horizontal axis
and market price of effort along the vertical axis. Effort and its market price are both
related to the same unit of measurement. For example, if effort is measured in trawl
hours the effort quota price is in $ per hour trawling, and if effort is measured in
whole-year operated trawlers, the price is in $ per trawler year. Resource rent per unit
effort is the difference between the average revenue per unit effort, AR(E), and the
marginal cost of effort, MC(E) (see figure 3.2). In a perfect market, disregarding
uncertainty, the effort quota price reflects the expected resource rent per unit effort
and the harvest quota price reflects the expected resource rent per unit harvest. The
licence price in figure 3.3 has its maximum for just one unit of effort, recalling that
1

A common definition of capacity often used in productivity studies is that of Johansen (1968): “The
maximum amount that can be produced per unit of time with existing plant and equipment, provided
the availability of variable factors of production is not restricted”.

42

the highest average resource rent is gained if only one unit of effort participates in the
fishery. At the other end of the effort price curve is the zero price for the open access
case. The quota price is zero if the number of effort quotas equals the amount of effort
that would establish itself under open access. In an open access fishery the market
price of quotas is zero because no resource rent is generated. The total value of the
quotas is, as usual, the product of price and quantity. In this case the maximum total
value of the effort quotas, which is the product m MEY E MEY shown in figure 3.3, is
equal to the maximum resource rent, Π MEY , shown in figure 3.2. Note that this
analysis relates to long run equilibrium harvesting where the manager has adapted the
number of effort quotas to maximise resource rent.

Figure 3.3. Effort quota price as a function of sustainable effort.

So far in this chapter we have studied some long-run aspects of fisheries, in
particular the cases of open-access and MEY management, assuming that the supply
of homogenous effort is plentiful at a constant marginal cost of effort, previously
denoted a. However, from the theory of the firm we recall that increasing marginal
cost is necessary to avoid corner solutions with “all” or “nothing” production. In

43

fisheries economics the declining stock as a function of effort helps avoid corner
solutions, as shown in figure 3.2. 2

Let us now assume that in the short run there is increasing marginal cost of
effort at the firm level (more on this in chapter 6). This means that if there is a market

Figure 3.4. Two firms’ demand for quotas as a function of quota price.
“Effort/harvest” means effort quota or harvest quota.
for effort quotas the firm wants to buy more quotas the cheaper they are; the firm may
be a multi-vessel company, a single vessel company or an owner-operated vessel. The
downward sloping demand curve corresponds fully to the regular firm’s demand for
any variable input that can be bought in the market. Figure 3.4 shows the equilibrium
in a quota market with two competitive firms. The quota price is shown on the vertical
axis. On the horizontal axis the distance CD measures the managers’ total supply of
effort quotas or harvest quotas. If effort quotas are used, the total supply CD has to be
less than the open access effort level to ensure demand and a positive price. If there is
a positive price for effort quotas this also ensures a positive price for harvest quotas,
and vice versa. In figure 3.4 quotas in firm A are measured off to the right from C and
quotas in firm B are measured off to the left from D. The AA curve expresses the
2

However, one corner solution in figure 3.2 would be zero effort and the virgin fish stock, in the case
where effort cost is too high for there to be an intersection between the MC(E) and the AR(E) curves.
Another corner solution would be for zero effort cost, implying extinction of the stock and zero effort
after the “extinction process” is finished.

44

value of the marginal quota in firm A and the BB curve measures the value of the
marginal quota in firm B. Thus the AA and the BB curves are the demand curves for
quotas for firms A and B respectively. Each of these demand curves depends upon
three things. First, the harvest technology for producing effort from capital, labour and
other inputs. Second, the price of fish; an increase in the price shifts the demand for
quota upwards. Third, the amount of vessel specific capital, which may be different
for the two firms. In this case depicted in figure 3.4 there is more vessel capital in firm
B than in firm A since the quota demand for any price m is higher in firm B than in
firm A.

Figure 3.4 shows that the quota price m* is the equilibrium price. For this
price the total quota, equal to the distance CD, is allocated between the two
competitive firms according to the profit maximising criterion. 3 If the initial quota
distribution is CG for firm A and DG for firm B, both firms will gain from a quota
trade. Firm A will sell quota FG to firm B, and the market equilibrium is established
at F with the quota price m*. In general, if the manager distributes for free the initial
total quota CD equally between several firms, which are allowed to trade quotas, a
competitive quota market ensures that the most efficient firms conduct the actual
harvest. This is also the case for any other initial free distribution of the total quota.
When quotas are distributed for free to the fish harvesting firms these firms reap the
benefits of a successful management regime. Alternatively the manager could auction
the quotas, and with a competitive market the equilibrium price is m*, as shown in
figure 3.4. The main difference between an auction and initially free quotas is in the
distribution of the resource rent. With an auction the auctioneer collects the resource
rent, whereas the rent benefits the recipients when quotas are distributed for free. This
may explain why fishers are usually in favour of free initial quotas and why they
oppose auctions.

Exercise 3.1
A fish stock with its distribution area limited to a bay is managed locally. Assume that
the following function describes the annual growth of the stock:
3

Our use of only two firms is of course to make the model and the discussion as simple as possible,
even though we know it takes more than two to create a competitive market.

45

