Journal of Economic Perspectives — Volume 7, Number 4 — Fall 1993 — Pages 113–134

Managing Local Commons:
Theoretical Issues in Incentive Design
Paul Seabright

G

rowing interest in environmental economics has led to a great deal of
work in recent years on the economics of local common property
resources, but it would be a mistake to think that the topic is in any
danger of being over-grazed. Local commons encompass a wide range of
resources whose shared feature is the need for some form of collective management, and pose interesting problems in such disparate sub-fields as agricultural
economics and the theory of the firm.
The definition of local common property resources must do two things:
first, define common property resources, and secondly, distinguish local from
other kinds of common property resources. Common property resources, as
the name suggests, are resources in which there exist property rights, but
property rights that are exercised (at least partly) collectively by members of a
group. There must also be rivalry in consumption of the resource within the
group; that is, an increase in the amount consumed by one individual reduces
the amount remaining for others to consume. What makes the right of control
collective, rather than individual, is simply the absence of a complete set of
contractual relations governing which member of the group is entitled or
required to do what. Like lawyers in a lifeboat, they find themselves obliged by
circumstances to cooperate. However, membership of the group is limited by
legally recognized and practically enforceable rights, and does not have to be
• Paul Seabright is Director of Studies in Economics, Churchill College, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.

114

Journal of Economic Perspectives

concerned with the possibility of "open access," namely the risk that additional
exploiters might have free entry to the resource.1
The typical examples of local commons, as opposed to other types of
commons, are often assets owned by reasonably small communities, such as
villages. These are distinguished from global commons in two main ways. Most
importantly, the main members of the local community are few enough to be
known to each other; some of their actions are observable; and consequently
they have the ability and sometimes the incentive to build reputations for
behaving in certain ways. By contrast, some global commons problems, like
global warming, involve billions of us. However, sometimes global commons
problems concern a limited set of known players, namely governments; what
distinguishes these cases from classic local commons is a second feature, namely
the absence of even the potential for intervention by a state that is more
powerful than any of the individuals. In the case of governments making
decisions about global warming, this simply means that no world government
exists to tackle the issue. For the purposes of this paper I shall define local
commons problems as small-numbers problems, but I shall generally also make
the empirical assumption that state intervention is one option among others for
resolution of these problems.
So local commons certainly include the familiar dramatis personae of environmental microeconomics, like grazing lands and inshore fisheries (although
since deep-sea fisheries are open to access by others, they fall into a separate
category). They include collectively managed irrigation systems such as canals
and tanks; subterranean aquifers and oil reserves; forests and many wildlife
habitats.2 But they also include many phenomena that should be analyzed in
similar terms, and which typically appear in very different areas of the
1
In an "open access" problem, as distinguished from the subject of this paper, any agreements
governing relations between existing exploiters are vulnerable to free entry by new exploiters from
outside. Thus, the problems of common property resources are typically both more complex (since
they concern interactions among specific individuals) and potentially more soluble than problems
of open access. In the literature, common property resources are sometimes defined more broadly,
as resources characterized by difficulty of exclusion as well as by rivalry in consumption (for
instance, Berkes, 1989, p. 91). On this view, open access problems are just one kind of common
property resource issue, namely one where it is impossible to exclude anybody. Feeny et al. (1990)
use the term communal property to refer to what are here called common property resources, namely
those where some people can be excluded but not others. It is not particularly important which set
of definitions is used, so long as each is used consistently, and so long as the issues raised by what
are here called common property resources are not confused with those of open access. I have also
here avoided use of the term "common pool resources," which may suggest that only the overall
stock of the resource matters, whereas I am interested in the more general case where potentially
many aspects of the management of a resource can be important.
2
Endangered species have typically been treated in the literature as open access problems. But as
Swanson (1993) emphasises, the fact that they are de facto open access should really be treated as
endogenous. Governments have the ability to safeguard endangered species by regulating access if
they wish to, and their unwillingness to do so is often the symptom of insufficient economic rent
generated by the survival of the species in question. Policies to preserve such species are often
better addressed to raising the rent appropriable by the parties with the power to control access,
than by such currently fashionable means as trade conventions.

Paul Seabright 115

economics literature: partnerships and joint-stock companies, for example.
Other situations that can be analyzed within this framework include households, research joint ventures, collective amenities in apartment buildings,
pension funds, university departments.

Establishing Common Interests
The bulk of the literature on common property resources has taken the
main analytical problem they raise to be one of resolving conflicts over the
contribution of different members towards a common management policy. As a
result, conflicts of interest over what is the optimal management of the resource
have been largely ignored. At first, this distinction may sound merely semantic.
After all, the difference in value to some member between the optimal management policy given the preferences of that member and a compromise management policy might be counted as part of the "contribution cost" paid by the
member towards the compromise solution. However, the distinction is important for two reasons.
First, social choice theory points out that the very existence of an optimal
collective management policy cannot be taken for granted, and that mechanisms to decide upon such a policy may be vulnerable to strategic manipulation. Secondly, the information required for commons management will be
much reduced if it can be assumed that the management policy for the
resource (for example, what its aggregate rate of depletion should be) can be
determined separately from the way that policy should be implemented (for
example, how the consumption made possible by the agreed-upon depletion
rate should be shared out among members). Call these two aspects of the
management problem the production plan and the implementation plan.
The separation of these tasks will be a reasonable assumption only when
everyone can agree on what would be the optimal production plan, without
knowing anything about the distribution plan. This may sound unlikely. But
remember that a firm's shareholders will unanimously support attempts by that
firm to maximize value (according to the Fisher separation theorem as described in Milne, 1974; DeAngelo, 1981), as long as the economy has complete
risk-sharing opportunities. Consequently it is possible to determine the firm's
optimum production plan (given a price system) without knowing anything
about shareholders' preferences or constraints. It follows that, for there to be
conflicts of interest between member-beneficiaries of a common property resource over the production plan, production decisions must make a significant
difference to at least some members' risk-sharing opportunities, and must do so
in different ways for different members.
An example should help to clarify the issue here. Consider a group of
farmers who have conflicting interests regarding the use of common grazing
land during periods of drought, according to whether or not they have access

116

Journal of Economic Perspectives

to irrigation. A strictly value-maximizing policy would restrict access to common grazing more during droughts than at other times because of the danger
of erosion; but it is precisely during droughts that those engaged in rain-fed
agriculture may find themselves most dependent upon livestock and therefore
most in need of common grazing. Therefore, in the absence of other means to
diversify away this risk they would prefer a policy that permitted them to react
to a drought by increasing their demands on the common grazing land. Their
conflict of interest with the farmers who have access to irrigation will in
consequence concern not just how the limited grazing opportunities should be
shared between them (the implementation plan), but will also extend to a basic
conflict of interest over the production plan—that is, over how much grazing in
total there should be when droughts occur.
Solving such conflicts of interest may be very difficult, and the absence of
appropriate means of compensation for the missing risk-sharing mechanisms
may lead to a breakdown of the management of the common property resource. In what follows, however, we shall be concerned mainly with the
problems of implementing a known optimal production plan. These problems,
as the empirical evidence shows, are quite serious enough.

Devising Incentives to Advance Common Interests
The central implementation problem for common property resources is
that, in the absence of binding agreements to the contrary, consumption of the
common resource by one agent will impose negative externalities on others.
Since individuals do not take these externalities into account, aggregate consumption of the resource is typically inefficiently high. Deforestation, overgrazing and excessive mineral depletion are the standard instances. In a classic
article, Garrett Hardin (1968) referred to this outcome as a "tragedy of the
commons." Alternatively, the externalities may mainly affect investment, in that
resources expended in the enhancement of the common property resource's
value will typically confer external benefits on other members, and underinvestment will result. Inadequate maintenance of irrigation systems and roads,
and neglect of drainage, fencing and upkeep of public land are common
examples.
The investment externality characterizes virtually all common property
resources, including such non-standard examples as firms and research joint
ventures: the tendency towards under-investment by shareholders in monitoring a firm's management is a classic example (Grossman and Hart, 1980). In
fact, the distinction between consumption and investment externalities is practically useful but not analytically important: the optimal production plan for
common property resources will typically involve most if not all members both
consuming less of the resource than their private incentives would lead them to

Managing Local Commons: Theoretical Issues

117

do, and investing more of their other resources in the maintenance and
enhancement of the common property resource's value.
How might members be induced to implement such a plan? The next
section will focus on informal mechanisms that may induce members of a
common property resource to undertake collectively beneficial but individually
costly actions. The following section will focus on more formal mechanisms: the
privatization of property rights, the decentralization of incentives within common ownership and control, and the delegation of management responsibility
to an agent so that participants are limited to a monitoring role. The value of
these more formal mechanisms will depend significantly upon the success or
lack of success of the informal mechanisms of collective management that they
replace.

Informal Incentives for Cooperative Behavior
Mechanisms of collective management tend to look very different under
the lenses of different social sciences. In particular, anthropologists and sociologists focus on the way in which individual behavior is governed by rules and
codes of conduct, the genesis of which is often explained by how well such rules
serve the interests of the group. Economists, by contrast, focus less upon rules
than upon incentives. Recent work in game theory has devoted much effort to
explaining cooperative behavior in terms of a more sophisticated understanding on the part of individuals about where their (individual) long-term interests
really lie. In particular, individuals face problems of collective action not once
but repeatedly. The knowledge that pursuit of their short-term interests can
harm their long-term aims by affecting the reaction of others in future interactions may be a powerful inducement to behavior that displays apparent solidarity with the interests of the group. This does not mean that economics has
undermined the validity of arguments that appeal to altruism or to social
norms; these different explanations are complementary, although their relative
importance will need careful empirical investigation.3
Economists who argue that cooperative behavior can grow out of selfinterest usually draw heavily on the theory of repeated games (see the survey
by Sabourian, 1990). Figure 1 displays a version of the familiar prisoners'
3

It is also likely that feelings of altruism and social solidarity, though extremely important, may be
more volatile and difficult to promote consciously than perceptions of self-interest. For instance,
familiarity and repeated interaction may provoke antipathy instead of sympathy between members
of a community. This does not justify ignoring altruism as a social phenomenon, but it may reduce
its amenability to systematic analysis. Graham Greene remarks of Scobie in The Heart of the Matter
that "they had been corrupted by money, and he had been corrupted by sentiment. Sentiment was
the more dangerous, because you couldn't name its price. A man open to bribes was to be relied
upon below a certain figure, but sentiment might uncoil in the heart at a name, a photograph, even
a smell remembered." For a contrary view, see Casson (1992), which develops a theory of
leadership as the promotion of cooperative action by the manipulation of people's preferences.

118

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Figure 1

A Prisoners' Dilemma

dilemma. If the two players know that they are playing the game only once,
then Player 1 reasons as follows: "Player 2 might either cooperate or defect. If 2
cooperates, than I am better off defecting, and receiving 5 rather than 4. If 2
defects, then I am still better off defecting, since I receive 0 rather than 10."
When both players reason this way, they both defect, and end up receiving 0.
The problem is whether, if the game is repeated a number of times, the two
players can find a way to cooperate.
The idea that repetition can sustain cooperation is based on the thought
that individuals tempted to defect may be dissuaded from doing so from fear of
losing the benefits of cooperation in the future. For this dissuasion to be
effective, three conditions must hold. First, the future must matter enough to
outweigh the immediate benefits to any individual of failing to cooperate; that
is, other players must have at their disposal retaliatory strategies that "hurt"
the deviator sufficiently in future periods, even when future payoffs are discounted.4 So, for instance, excluding those who breach their fishing quotas
from the fishing grounds in the future must be a sufficiently damaging prospect
to outweight any immediate gains from over-fishing. In the prisoners' dilemma
example in Figure 1, the benefits to and costs of cooperation are symmetric, but
asymmetry of itself need not threaten cooperation so long as there exists, for
each player, a retaliation strategy capable of outweighing the gains to that player
of failing to cooperate.
4

More generally, imagine that if both players cooperate, they both receive X. If both defect, both
receive 0. If one defects and one cooperates, the player who cooperates receives Z, while the
player who defects receives Y. The only restrictions are that Y > X > 0, that 2X > Y Z and that
Z > 0. There is a discount factor g. Then we know that provided Y X < gX/(1 g) there exists a
retaliation strategy which consists of playing Defect for a finite number of periods in the event that
the other player has played Defect after an agreement to cooperate, and which ensures that the
other player is no better off from the defection. Let T be the lowest integer such that Y X gX +
g2X + . . . + gTX. Then T is the smallest number of periods for which each player must threaten to
retaliate in order for the threat credibly to sustain cooperation. If, on the other hand, it happens
that Y X gX/(1 g), then there exists no finite T, and consequently no retaliatory strategy
that can sustain cooperation.

Paul Seabright

119

Secondly, these retaliatory strategies must be credible, which means that,
once an individual has defected, it must be in the others' interest to put the
retaliation into effect. For example, excluding those who have breached their
fishing quotas must not require an unreasonable level of effort on the part of
others in policing the fishing grounds. Abandoning an agreement to restrict
extraction rates of a mineral asset (as a punishment for free-riding by some
parties to that agreement) must not reduce its stock so substantially as to
damage the interests of the retaliators by more than the original free-riding
did. So when will retaliation be credible? It may be credible naturally (retaliation may be what they would anyway do in the circumstances, as when it
involves playing a Nash equilibrium of the prisoners' dilemma game). Alternatively, it may be true because of a credible agreement between the affected
parties to put the retaliation into effect. In the latter circumstance, retaliation is
itself a form of collective action, which must therefore be credible if the original
collective action is to be credible. It is in this respect that one can think of the
setting up of police forces, inspectorates and similar institutions as a central
form of common property resource management. The formal mechanisms to
be discussed in the next section are therefore special cases of the more general
repeated game response to one-shot inefficiencies.
Thirdly, the benefits of cooperation in the future must themselves be
sufficiently probable to act as an incentive to cooperation in the present. Sheer
repetition of the game is not enough to ensure this. For example, if the game is
to be played a fixed number of times, then both players will know before the
last repetition of the game that defection in that last round cannot be punished
and that therefore cooperation is unlikely in that round. But knowing that,
they will each defect in the penultimate round. And knowing that, the argument by backward induction holds that they will defect even in the original
round.
For future cooperation to be a sufficiently probable incentive, one of a
number of conditions must hold. The game may be infinitely repeated, or there
may be sufficient uncertainty about how many times it will be repeated. An
alternative solution is "reputation;" even a very small probability that the
player is of a type that intrinsically prefers to cooperate acts as an incentive to
all types of players to behave cooperatively, so long as the game is sufficiently
far from its final period for the loss of a reputation for cooperation to be costly.5
Another is bounded rationality, where a small probability that the player is of a
type to cooperate "irrationally" has much the same effect (Radner, 1980).
Finally, the one-shot game may have multiple Nash equilibria over which all
players have a strict preference ordering (Benoit and Krishna, 1985; Friedman,
1985; Fraysse and Moreaux, 1985). In all cases, the possibility of cooperation
depends upon players' not discounting future payoffs too heavily (or
5

See Kreps et al. (1982); the argument is sufficiently well known not to bear repeating in detail
here. Dasgupta (1988) provides an application of the reputation model to the problem of building
up trust.

120

Journal of Economic Perspectives

equivalently, on their interacting at sufficiently frequent intervals); if they don't
place much value on the future, the gains from short-term self-interested
behavior may be too great for any future inducements to outweigh.6 They must
also be able to observe one another's behavior with sufficient reliability to
observe whether agreements are being kept.
To this point, the considerations discussed in this section are all essentially
forward-looking: people will cooperate if they expect to gain in the future from
doing so. Much of the empirical literature on the management of common
property resources, however, stresses that historical considerations also play an
extremely important part in accounting for successful collective action. In
particular, traditions and institutions of collective action can increase the
likelihood of successful collective action in the future, and we often observe that
cooperative institutions work more successfully when they are embedded in a
context in which collective action has worked in the past. Alternatively put,
cooperation can be habit-forming (Seabright, 1993).
What can the theory of repeated games say about this phenomenon? One
possibility that immediately springs to mind is that all cooperative equilibrium
strategies in repeated games must be to some extent history-dependent, if only
in the simplest of ways: the possibility of retaliation depends on actions that are
sensitive to what other players have done in previous periods.7 So, a breakdown of cooperation in one period would be expected to lead to a failure of
cooperation in a future period, by way of retaliation. Unfortunately, this
suggestion is not very useful as a way of explaining a tendency for cooperation
to be habit-forming. What it tells us is that the use of threats that are history6

In the limit, when the complete information game is repeated infinitely often and there is no
discounting of the future, the Folk Theorem states that any individually rational payoffs (that is,
payments that make continued participation preferable to withdrawing from the game) can be
supported as an equilibrium, by a suitable choice of strategies to punish players who deviate from
the equilibrium behavior. The Folk Theorem is couched in terms of Nash equilibrium strategies
(and may therefore rely on threat strategies that are not credible out of equilibrium). But an
extension by Aumann and Shapley (1976) and Rubinstein (1976) shows that any individually
rational payoffs can also be supported as a sub-game perfect equilibrium. The idea is to construct
strategies that punish players who fail to play their part in punishing those who deviate from
equilibrium behavior; the infinite horizon ensures that any player can always be punished for long
enough to prevent any deviation from being worthwhile. Unfortunately this result is not necessarily
robust in the presence of even very slight discounting of the future, although Fudenberg and
Maskin (1986) show that it will be so under certain conditions (namely that the dimension of the
space of individually rational payoffs is as great as the number of players). Abreu et al. (1990) prove
important and intuitive results for the case of repeated games with discounting and imperfect
monitoring, including the proposition that the equilibrium average value set is monotonic in the
discount factor (which means, roughly, that an increased degree of concern for the future always
results in increased benefits from cooperation).
7
Dutta and Sundaram (1993) point out that tragedies of the commons can be avoided even in
Markovian games where strategies are restricted to being functions of the current state and cannot
draw on memory. This is because the stock of the resource can act as a state variable that in some
sense embodies a (restricted) memory of past actions. In some equilibria there can even be
under-exploitation; however, efficient levels of exploitation cannot be sustained by Markovian
strategies.

Managing Local Commons: Theoretical Issues

121

dependent can enable parties to achieve efficient outcomes; but if the outcomes
are achieved, the threats do not need to be exercised, so we may never see any
history-dependence in observed behavior. What we need to know is why
cooperation sometimes works and sometimes doesn't, and whether the fact that
there has been cooperation in the past should by itself make any difference to
the prospects of cooperation in the future.
Another possibility is that, in the absence of effective means of communication between players, past history may act as a mechanism which enables them
to coordinate in selecting between the multiplicity of potential equilibria to
which we know repeated interactions give rise.8 However, it is hard to believe
that this is practically important for local commons. First of all, in the kinds of
cooperative institutions that are typically established to manage local commons,
there is no difficulty about communication. On the contrary, members may
spend a long time communicating with each other (or squabbling, to put the
matter less clinically), but may still fail to resolve their difficulties in implementing successful collective action. Secondly, if individuals are seeking to coordinate their actions, it is hard to understand why they should ever choose to
coordinate on any but efficient outcomes. If we observe failures of cooperation
in the past followed by failures of cooperation in the future, it seems perverse to
imagine that the reason for this is that players have chosen to coordinate on an
equilibrium with little cooperation (when they might have chosen to coordinate
on one with more).
So if none of these arguments really explains the observation that cooperation does seem to be habit-forming, what sort of analysis does demonstrate the
point? To begin, since cooperation often fails even when the opportunities for
communication are good, we can infer that cooperation is hard to sustain. This
suggests that most common property resource problems involve either high
discount rates (relative to the frequency with which opportunities occur for
repeated cooperation), or one-off benefits from defection that are high relative
to the per period costs to the defector of retaliation. This accords with common
sense. Suppose an institution is established to protect common grazing land in
a village. It may take some time to discover that the rules of grazing are being
flouted or that the officers have embezzled the funds set aside to put up fences.
Even though the previously cooperative members may now withdraw their
cooperation in retaliation, the dishonest officers or the uncooperative grazers
may have benefitted by enough in the meantime for this retaliation to leave
them no worse off than they would have been by cooperating.

8

For example, Crawford and Haller (1990) develop a model in which agents in repeated coordination games use past behavior to assist their coordination among multiple equilibria in the future. In
their framework, where there are multiple equilibria of each stage game, the choice of past
equilibria is used to coordinate on future equilibria. If applied to the prisoners' dilemma, players
would need to use past strategies (which might not have been equilibrium strategies of the one-shot
game considered in isolation) to coordinate on future equilibria.

122

Journal of Economic Perspectives

In circumstances like these—namely, where the sustainability of cooperation is a marginal matter—the presence or absence of trust will affect the extent
to which cooperation succeeds. By "trust" here I mean the expectation by
members of a group that other members will cooperate. The very fact that the
immediate benefits from defecting are large implies that it makes a significant
difference to individuals whether they cooperate anticipating similar behavior
on the part of others, or choose instead to defect without waiting for others to
do so first. A good analogy is a cease-fire during a civil war: if each side expects
the cease-fire to hold, it has less of an incentive to make a pre-emptive strike,
and consequently the cease-fire is more likely to hold.
This presence or absence of trust may itself depend on past traditions and
institutions; in short, institutions can channel trust. In Seabright (1993), I
develop a model of "habit-forming" cooperation in which the frequency of past
cooperation determines the probability of future cooperation. The basic idea of
the model is that people's expectations about how cooperative others will be
may fluctuate randomly. If people's moods are correlated, but not perfectly
correlated, then any one person's expectation about the cooperativeness of
others will amount to an expectation about how likely others are to be
sufficiently optimistic about the prospects for cooperation to be willing to
cooperate themselves. Cooperation is then induced by "optimism about the
level of optimism," which is something that pre-existing institutions can channel and enhance. The same paper reports an econometric study of milk
producers' cooperative societies in India, which are organizations requiring
small farmers to sell milk at less than open market prices in return for the
provision of a number of collective benefits such as access to finance and
infrastructure. The study suggests that, controlling for directly economic variables, the presence of a prior history of cooperative institutions in the communities concerned was a positive predictor of cooperative society success.
What exactly does it mean to say that institutions can "channel" trust? One
possibility is simply that certain institutions, by giving people the opportunity to
undertake collective action, allow them to establish a reputation for cooperation
that will serve them well in the future. So, for instance, in the study just
reported, villages whose members had previously organized collective religious
festivals (as opposed to those where festivals were organized by sub-groups such
as caste), were more likely to make a success of milk-producers' cooperatives.
Likewise, many voluntary organizations working in poor countries concern
themselves with promoting plays, festivals and sporting activities among disadvantaged groups, not only because of these activities' intrinsic value but because
they know of their value in "building trust."
A second possibility is more subtle, and appeals to the idea that institutions
may allow the establishment of "collective reputation." For instance, Kreps
(1990) discusses the way in which the reputation of individuals undertaking
market transactions will be heavily influenced by the reputation of the firms to
which they belong; indeed, one of the primary purposes of firms is to transmit

Paul Seabright 123

reputation across cohorts of employees. Tirole (1993) proposes that the persistence of corruption in a society may partly be explained by the fact that
younger generations "inherit" the reputation of their elders; those born to
corrupt elders will in consequence have less incentive to be honest themselves.
An unresolved theoretical question is why some institutions are more effective
than others at transmitting reputation across cohorts of members; but given
that they are effective, such institutions may then represent a mechanism
whereby cooperation can be habit-forming.
Both these suggestions imply that trust is to be understood as a kind of
capital good, embodied either in individuals or in the organizations to which
they belong, and which acts as a state variable whose value influences the
probability of future cooperation independently of the direct payoffs associated
with such cooperation. In addition, informal institutions that enhance cooperative management of common property resources may also act in other more or
less formal ways to change the direct payoffs. They may act as monitoring
mechanisms, for example: by helping members to observe the behavior of
others, they may make it easier to implement retaliation strategies. For instance, Indian cooperative societies with relatively educated officers were reported in Seabright (1993) to be more successful; closer investigation revealed
this to be not because the more educated were intrinsically more trustworthy,
but because they were more likely to have implemented mechanisms of quality
control that diminished members' incentives to "cheat" by watering down their
milk. An alternative, more subtle possibility is that in circumstances where it is
unclear what kind of behavior is consistent with optimal resource management,
institutions may help members to coordinate on relatively simple (and therefore more easily monitored) standards of acceptable behavior (Kreps, 1990,
suggests this to be the main function of a corporate culture). A number of
empirical studies have reported the successful evolution within relatively short
periods of time of collective management institutions whose primary function is
monitoring and the clarification of rules (Feeny et al., 1990, p. 10–11).9
Whatever the mechanisms invoked, many recent contributions to the
literature have stressed that relatively informal collective management of common property resources can in the right circumstances avoid the severe resource degradation predicted by "the tragedy of the commons." Nevertheless,
both empirical and theoretical arguments suggest that cooperative behavior
9

Some writers on problems of collective action in developing countries have suggested that these
may often be modelled better as a coordination game (sometimes called an assurance game) than a
prisoners' dilemma (Runge, 1986; Stevenson, 1991, especially pp. 73–76). In a coordination game,
unlike the prisoners' dilemma, it is in the players' interests to cooperate even when they play only
once, provided they can be assured that others (or enough others, where multi-person games are in
question) will do the same. It is obviously an empirical matter whether particular situations are
indeed better modelled as one type of game rather than another. However, one way of viewing the
literature on repeated games is as analyzing the circumstances under which the threat of retaliation
transforms a prisoners' dilemma in the one-shot game into a supergame whose overall payoff
structure is in fact an assurance game.

124

Journal of Economic Perspectives

may be only partial, and the incentives of short-term self-interest only partially
held in check. Under what circumstances, then, can more formal implementation mechanisms make good the deficiency? And, given that formal incentives
are typically stronger than informal ones, are there any reasons why informal
incentives might nevertheless sometimes be preferred?

Formal Incentives for Cooperative Behavior
The distinction between formal and informal implementation mechanisms
is itself only an informal one. Nevertheless, a useful pragmatic line can be
drawn between cases where uncooperative behavior by individuals is met
merely by a withdrawal of cooperation by others, and those where cooperation
is enforced by rewards and punishments that are defined in law or in customary practice, and are enforceable by appeal to courts or other institutions of
arbitration. This section considers the theoretical rationale for three kinds of
formal inducement to cooperative behavior in the management of common
property resources: the privatization of property rights; the decentralization of
incentives within common ownership and control; and the delegation of management responsibility to an agent so that participants are limited to a monitoring role.
Privatization of Property Rights: Can Trade Destroy Trust?
The case for privatizing property rights in what have hitherto been common property resources rests on the view that having an individual or firm own
the resource will lead to the resource being allocated in a more efficient way.
Any private property right requires specifying enforceable and appropriate
contractual relations. Sometimes the means of doing this (and especially the
technology embodied in a modern legal system) have only recently become
available in developing countries, so privatization is seen as a response to
changing conditions rather than an adverse judgment on the appropriateness
of collective management for previous conditions.
The desirability of privatization for any particular common property resource is, of course, an empirical matter. Stevenson (1991), for example,
demonstrates econometrically the higher productivity of pasturing under private than under common property in Switzerland, while nevertheless accepting
that transactions costs may make privatization infeasible in some circumstances.
But in addition to the costs of specifying and enforcing rights, there are a
number of things that can go wrong in attempting to introduce private
property rights in what was once a common property resource; identifying
these factors will help to describe in which situations privatization is more or
less likely to succeed. All of the problems with privatization have their roots in
the fact that private contractual rights can provide effective incentives for only

Managing Local Commons: Theoretical Issues

125

some of the many individual actions that may be required for implementing an
efficient production plan. Other necessary actions may remain unenforceable,
either because they are unobservable by some of the affected parties or by the
enforcing authorities, or because they are too complex to be specified in
contractual form (actual contracts, in other words, are likely to be incomplete).
As a result, the attempt to enforce private contractual rights may lead to a
breakdown of whatever cooperative mechanisms may have evolved among
those who shared implicit, non-contractual rights in the common property
resource beforehand.
For example, the privatization of areas of forest for timber production may
fail to internalize all the externalities involved (so there will still be excess
production and inadequate replanting). It may also fail to respect some of the
implicit entitlements of those who previously used the forest for food, fuelwood
or medicine, in ways that are both inequitable and inefficient. They are
inequitable because implicit entitlements are still entitlements; and they are
inefficient because they fail to build on the fact that those who benefit from a
resource may also be induced to contribute to its maintenance, and some of
them may have a comparative advantage in doing so (those who live in the
forest may be in a position more easily to monitor its rate of degradation, for
instance).
Must private property make it more difficult to respect implicit entitlement? It might be thought that the breakdown of pre-existing cooperative
mechanisms shows merely a failing in the particular system of private property
rights introduced, and has no implications one way or the other for the merits
or otherwise of private property in itself. But in fact there are two important
reasons, intrinsic to the nature of (most) private property systems, that suggest
how privatization may threaten implicit entitlements. First, privatization typically changes the relative bargaining power of those who depend upon the
resource, giving more power to those who acquire the property rights and less
to those who do not, in a way that may be sufficiently asymmetric to undermine
the mutual dependence that was the incentive to cooperate originally. For
example, privatizing grazing land may not completely prevent encroachment,
but may reduce the incentives of those without private rights to prevent erosion
on the land belonging to those who do. Privatizing forest land, by making forest
dwellers unable to rely on traditional sources of food or fuelwood, may
encourage more destructive practices (say of slash-and-burn) and discourage
care of newly-planted saplings. In addition, it is difficult to frame formal
contractual rights so as to safeguard traditional entitlements (a clause requiring
landowners to grant "reasonable" access to "responsible" grazers or forest
dwellers would be very hard to enforce).
In fact, it is quite possible that by diminishing incentives for informal
cooperation, privatization may make both parties worse off—including the
owner of the newly created property right! This possibility is suggested by the
game in Figure 2. In this game, Player 1 has a property right, which means that

126

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Figure 2

The Dilemma After Privatization

if both players defect, Player 1 ends up better off than Player 2. Consequently
the threat of retaliation by Player 2 can no longer hurt Player 1 sufficiently to
induce him to cooperate. But notice that in spite of this, cooperation is still
better for both players than defecting.10 So there is a sense in which members
of a common property resource can in some circumstances be made better off
by being denied rights that appear superficially to be to their advantage.
There is an air of paradox about this conclusion, since it might seem that
Player 1 could simply offer to relinquish his property right. But voluntary
relinquishment may not be credible, since (if cooperation breaks down) there
10
More generally, following the framework from note 4, imagine that it remains true that if both
players cooperate, both receive X, and if one cooperates while the other defects, the defector
receives Y while the cooperator receives Z. However, if both players defect, it is now true that the
player with the property right receives A, while the player without the property right receives A.
Assume that 0 < A < X, Z. This shift may be enough to prevent Player 2 from credibly threatening
a retaliation sufficiently costly to Player 1 to enforce the cooperative outcome. To see this, note that
even if there exists a T such that

Y

X

gX + g2X + . . . + gTX

(1)

which is the condition for there to exist a cooperative equilibrium of the infinite repetition of the
game in Figure 1, there may exist no T* such that
Y

X

g(X

A) + g2(X

A) + . . . + gT*(X

A)

(2)

which is the analogous condition for Figure 2. Indeed, given the value of T, for T* to exist requires
(by manipulation of (1) and (2)):
(1

gT*)/(1

gT)

X/(X

A)

(3)

and for any G there evidently exist values of A sufficiently close to X such that (3) is not satisfied.
Notice that the shift in bargaining power has made both players worse off (not just player 1), since
now their discounted equilibrium payoffs are gA(1 g) and gA(g 1) respectively, which by
assumption are less than those of the cooperative equilibrium.

Paul Seabright 127

may be nothing to prevent him from re-asserting it. Thus a promise by
landowners not to prevent entry to their land by forest dwellers may not be
credible given the fact that private property entitles them to bring actions for
trespass; the only way for them to make this promise credible may be for there
not to be privatization at all. And intermediate kinds of property (such as
logging rights) may not give a credible mechanism of enforcement to the forest
dwellers (as inhabitants of the Amazon basin have discovered).
This leads naturally to the second and more subtle reason why private
property may make it difficult to respect implicit entitlements. This is that some
of the mechanisms that sustain informal cooperation—like a reputation for
cooperating or the threat of retaliation—require reasonably long time horizons,
the reliability of which may be undermined by the tradeability of private
property rights. For example, those who farm communally owned land may be
prepared to invest in the soil's fertility by using organic fertilizer, may plant
trees to prevent erosion and so on. But once ownership is privatized, even an
assurance that present owners would continue to respect the implicit entitlements of farmers to the fruits of their investment may be inadequate if present
owners are able at any time to sell their land to new owners without such a
reputation.
Exactly this kind of argument has been advanced in the context of firms by
Shleifer and Summers (1988), who point to the possible adverse consequences
of highly liquid markets in the ownership of firms. Hostile takeovers, they
suggest, may result in "breaches of trust" when incoming management teams
cut wages or fire workers who had previously invested in firm-specific human
capital for which existing management had promised adequate remuneration
(but without being able to make such an understanding contractually binding).
Even in the absence of an actual takeover, the knowledge that share markets
are sufficiently liquid to make a takeover possible is, they suggest, a serious
disincentive to efficient levels of investment in firm-specific human capital.11
Intuitively appealing as this argument is, it is somewhat trickier than it
sounds. The reputation model suggests that owners will be deterred from
inadequately rewarding the specific human capital investments of workers by
fear of the loss of their reputation. However, that reputation is itself a sunk
cost; if owners sell the firm, the best price they can receive for it from new
owners is the value of the firm under owners who lack a reputation for
honoring implicit contracts; the price will discount the cost to them of the
retaliation they may expect to face. Consequently, the incentive to sell the firm
to new owners who will breach implicit contracts is no greater than the

11

This has striking affinities with the argument in Hirshman (1970). According to him, members of
an organization may resort to the options of "exit" or "voice" if the organization is not being run as
they would wish; but the exercise of voice typically generates positive externalities for members of
the organization, and excessive ease of exit may therefore result in inadequate use of voice. Similar
arguments underlie some people's opposition to easy divorce laws.

128

Journal of Economic Perspectives

temptation to breach implicit contracts directly.12 Or, to put it another way,
selling the firm to disreputable owners is itself a disreputable act. So the
tradeability of property rights as such has no direct effect on the incentive properties of
long-term relationships.

This does not mean that there is nothing in the argument that tradeability
of property rights can weaken incentives for relationship-specific investment.
But such weakening, if it occurs, is not due to the intrinsic undermining of the
credibility of reputation or the threat of retaliation by the tradeability of
property rights alone. Something more must be added to the story. Suppose,
for example, the new owners differ from the old in that breaching the implicit
contract offers them a higher payoff. For instance, new owners may be less
concerned about the anger and resentment of the existing workers or tenants
on the common resource. Then they may be less deterred by the threat of
retaliation and may consequently be willing to offer a price for the asset that
does not discount for the expected retaliation by as much as the cost of such
retaliation to the original owners.
What welfare consequences follow therefore from the tradeability of property rights? It may happen that the welfare of the owner of an asset is higher if
the owner is prevented from selling than if the owner's rights are tradeable.
This will be true in the case where the owner is unique in some way (perhaps
through having enjoyed a long-standing relationship with workers or tenants),
making it likely that any alternative owner will have more immediately to gain
from breaching the implicit contracts. Given the possibility of a sale, this risk
will dissuade cooperation with the present owner. Conversely, owners that can
commit themselves not to sell, or to do so only subject to safeguarding the
interest of workers and tenants, may thereby help themselves as well.
In many common property resources, there is no absolute prohibition on
trading the right to membership, but typically the admission of new members
requires the consent of (at least some of) the existing members, a stipulation
that may be enough to mitigate the problem described above. Systems of
private property, by contrast, often face difficulties, since it is impossible to
specify formal incentives to safeguard the interests of existing members (indeed, that is typically the reason why there were implicit rather than explicit
contracts in the first place).
12
Using the notation in footnote 4, assume that Player 1 (who moves first) represents a worker or
tenant who must decide whether to make a relationship-specific investment, while player 2 decides
whether or not to reward this. Cooperation will be an equilibrium if Y X < gX/(1 g). What
difference does it make if the owner now has the opportunity to sell out instead of deciding
whether or not to reward the investment? Clearly the owner will sell if the price P received is
greater than or equal to the value of continuing to own the asset, i.e. if P X/(1 g). How much
would a new owner be prepared to bid if she were intending to breach the implicit contract? The
first period payoff would be Y, then there would be a period of retaliation for the minimum
necessary T periods, and only then would the benefits of cooperation resume. So the value V to the
new owner is Y = gT + 1X/(1 g). Into this expression we can substitute the equation defining T in
footnote 4, to yield that V < X/(1 g) and consequently that V is always less than P. This shows
that any owner who would honor implicit contracts cannot receive a price greater than or equal to
the continuation value of the firm from an owner who would not.

Managing Local Commons: Theoretical Issues

129

Two caveats are in order. First, it has so far been assumed that the new
owner differs from the old owner only in receiving higher payoffs from
choosing not to cooperate. If, however, the new owner is also more efficient at
managing the firm in equilibrium, the costs of denying tradeable property
rights would be correspondingly higher. There is a trade-off: private property
may damage implicit contracts, but it is also likely to match owners more
efficiently to their assets. Secondly, the welfare of the old owner is not the only
important consideration, since that owner did not internalize the welfare of
workers/tenants in decisions. So introducing tradeable property rights, even if
it is in the interest of owners, may damage the interests of workers and tenants
by enough to outweigh this benefit.
To summarize, it should be clear that private property rights not only may
fail to solve the problems of externalities that bedevil common property resources. When contractual relations remain in important respects incomplete,
private property may also weaken the mechanisms of cooperation that previously existed, either by shifting the bargaining power of the parties so that they
no longer share enough interdependence to make cooperation credible, or by
weakening the credibility of long-term contracts. However, we have also seen
that the circumstances under which the latter problem occurs are somewhat
special. Long-term implicit contracts are not weakened by the mere fact of
tradeability of property rights in assets; it is tradeability plus a sufficient
likelihood of the presence of potential new owners with different out-ofequilibrium payoffs that is the key factor. Establishing that such circumstances
exist empirically may require quite careful examination of the evidence.

Decentralization of Incentives under Common Management
It often happens that the members of a local common property resource
meet and decide on systems of rewards and penalties to implement a production plan. The most frequent means of doing so are production quotas,
reinforced by systems of monitoring, with fines or the threat of exclusion from
the common property resource altogether for those who breach the agreement.
Such quotas have been evident in agreements over grazing land (see
McCloskey, 1976, for the medieval English commons, and the contributions
surveyed in Feeny et al., 1990); in control of fisheries (Berkes, 1986); and in the
production agreements of the OPEC oil cartel. As the discussion to this point
would imply, cooperation will be feasible in these situations only when the
penalties for breaching quotas are sufficiently large relative to the gains from
doing so.
One circumstance that favors the chances for cooperation is when members
of the common property resource also share access to additional resources.
Suppose the common property resource is grazing land or an irrigation system,
but it is owned by a village; individuals who breach the agreed quotas can be
punished by being denied access not merely to the common property resource
but to some of the other benefits of village membership. When these additional

130

Journal of Economic Perspectives

benefits are sufficiently important, village leaders have the power to levy fines
or impose other punishments that substantially enhance the credibility of the
cooperative outcome.
Why are quantitative instruments, like quotas for enforcing production
plans, so much more common than price-based instruments like taxes? One
answer is that for many common property resources that involve renewable
resources such as forests or fisheries, the damage done by misjudging the
optimum utilization rate may be very much higher than that due to misjudging
members' willingness to pay. For example, an unexpected surge in demand
one year would under quotas lead to unexpectedly high prices; this may be
preferable to the outcome under a tax system, namely unexpectedly high
production which could leave the fishery seriously depleted and requiring
several years of nursing back to optimum levels. In general, when the optimum
use of a resource lies quite close to the level below which the resource's capacity
for self-renewal is seriously damaged, and when some uncertainty is involved in
how any control mechanism will work, a quota will pose lower risks than a price
mechanism (Weitzman, 1974).
A second reason for the prevalence of quotas is the comparative ease with
which they allow decentralization of the monitoring process. It is often easier
for other members of the common property resource to observe whether a
quota has been violated than to know whether a particular member is evading
the terms of some (possibly non-linear) optimum schedule of Pigouvian taxes.
The former can usually be monitored by observing production, which happens
within the common resource, whereas the latter may require monitoring of
market transactions, which can happen anywhere. This consideration may also
account for the observed prevalence of systems of strict equality among members in production rights even when efficiency considerations might suggest
otherwise: Feeny et al. (1990) report agreements to fish in rotation to ensure
equal access to the best sites in Turkey; random assignment of harvest produce
to households in meadow commons in Japan; and revenue pooling regardless
of the productivity of individual members in a fishing cooperative in New
Jersey. In all of these cases a visible commitment to equality of treatment,
besides facilitating monitoring, may also have helped to build up mutual trust.
When a group simply pools its output, it assures that the benefits of any
excessive production are shared among its members, rather than privately
appropriated.

Delegation of Management Responsibility to an Agent
All forms of collective management involve some asymmetry in the degree
of involvement of different parties. At one end of the spectrum is the practice of
delegating managerial responsibility to an agent charged with managing the
asset on behalf of others; at the other, full participatory decision-making. In the
middle of the range, a smaller group of agents are chosen by the larger group,

Paul Seabright 131

which simply means that the collective management problem of the original
owners of the common property resource is reproduced in miniature among
the agents.
The delegation of responsibility to an agent does not, of course, leave the
original members with nothing to do (otherwise they might as well just sell the
asset); but it does limit their activities to a monitoring rather than a fully
participatory role. So when is it desirable for members of a common property
resource to specialize—some in management, some in monitoring—rather
than all attempting a combination of the two? And what might be the source of
gains from specialization? Another way to pose these questions is to inquire
under what circumstances economies (or possibly diseconomies) of scope between the management and monitoring tasks are offset by diseconomies (or
possibly economies) of scale in the management and monitoring tasks
themselves.
Some jobs can be easily monitored using almost none of the skill or the
effort that are required for the task's performance: someone who has never
held a spade can tell fairly easily how fast someone else is digging. Others need
much more: refereeing a scientific paper may require as much skill, as well as
(notoriously) sometimes almost as much effort as writing it. Delegation of
management responsibility is much more likely where the management of the
resource resembles the first kind of task rather than the second, since those
who delegate thereby save themselves a substantial amount of work.
But is is important not to confuse the ease with which management can be
monitored and the ease with which management can itself monitor any resources it employs. For instance, suppose a community needs to dig an
irrigation channel. It makes sense to delegate this job to a manager, since the
main activity (digging) can be monitored by the manager, and it is easy for the
rest of the community to see how fast the channel is progressing. By contrast,
suppose the community wants to landscape some parkland. Again the main
activity is digging, and it is just as easy for the manager to monitor this. But it
now matters very much how and where this digging takes place, and it is
harder for the rest of the community to monitor the management of the project
without interesting themselves substantially in its details. Collective management is in such circumstances a more likely outcome.
Even in the latter case the evident economies of scope between the
management and monitoring tasks are to an extent offset by economies of scale;
it is senseless to duplicate the management of all the little tasks involved in a
landscaping project. Likewise the job of policing a collective agreement to
restrict grazing on common land may be worth delegating to employed guards
during the night hours, even if it is unnecessary during the daytime because
other members can combine the policing task with their own grazing.
The benefits of delegation will also depend on the extent to which the
conflicts of interest between the agent and the principals who are the members
of the common property resource can be minimized through appropriate

132

Journal of Economic Perspectives

remuneration procedures. As the literature on principal-agent problems within
firms has emphasized (Jensen and Meckling, 1976), aligning the interests of
agents with those of principals is usually restricted by the risk aversion of
agents, which makes it very costly for them to bear the full marginal responsibility for their actions. Consequently, the incentives for managing a firm usually
consist of a combination of direct financial incentives (like profit-related pay
and stockholdings), monitoring by principals, and contingent transfers of control rights to other parties in the event of certain management difficulties, like
bankruptcy (Aghion and Bolton, 1992). Recent work in this field has emphasized that for such incentives to be effective, those who have the ability to
monitor management must have the power to intervene if management acts
contrary to principals' interests, and also the interest in intervening on behalf of
the principals (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1992).
This lesson is nowhere more important than in those circumstances where
management of a common property resource has been taken over by the state.
The state differs from other agents to whom management of a common
property resource might theoretically be delegated in that the chain of delegation is typically longer; citizens delegate to their political representatives who
delegate to government ministers who delegate to senior civil servants who
delegate to junior civil servants and so on. This long chain of delegation may be
unavoidable for non-local commons, but for local commons, shorter chains of
delegation are probably feasible. If agents of the state are to be involved in the
management of a common resource, they need an incentive to act in the
interests of those to whom the resource notionally belongs. Where state management has worked, it has usually been through local involvement and
empowerment of those who depend on the resource for their livelihood (see
Chopra, Kadekodi and Murty, 1989, for the example of forest resources in the
Himalayan foothills). It is not necessarily that their monitoring abilities are
superior to those of the state's agents—the latter may be able to call on more
sophisticated monitoring technologies—but their interests in the optimal management of the resource may be much greater.
The principal-agent literature has tended to emphasize the problems faced
by dispersed principals in monitoring the activities of their agents: in this case,
the problem of citizens in monitoring their government. A more realistic
approach would recognize that in many principal-agent problems it is those
who are notionally the agents who write their own contracts, subject to a
greater or lesser degree to the power of veto by their principals. Agents can
thereby become entrenched, implementing policies in their own private interests, owing to the costs to dispersed principals of organizing to dislodge them.
Nowhere is this more true than when principals are voters and their agents are
the many kinds of employees of the modern state. Much of the reaction against
state management of local common property resources (whether these are
traditional environmental common property resources or others such as
industrial enterprises) can be seen as a rewriting by citizens of the terms of their

Managing Local Commons: Theoretical Issues

133

contracts with managing agents, a rewriting that often occurs drastically because the transactions costs between citizens mean that it is forced to take place
infrequently.

Conclusion
It can be easy for economists from industrialized countries to disparage
developing country management of common property resources, because
property rights aren't clear, monitoring arrangements seem very informal, and
government agencies are unresponsive to citizens. But of all the professions,
economists should perhaps be most sensitive to the fallacy that if the government isn't managing something according to a formal plan, then great inefficiency must be occurring. Likewise, they should be wary of assuming that
moving from one situation of imprecise incentives to another with more formal
but still somewhat imprecise incentives will always improve efficiency. Local
communities have often evolved sophisticated informal methods of managing
common property resources. As developing countries move towards greater
clarity and enforceability of laws, towards greater reliance on markets, and
perhaps towards more democratic government, it is important that these
mechanisms not be ignored, disparaged or lost.
• I should like to thank Jacques Crémer, Jean Tirole, Bhaskar Vira and the editors of
this journal for very helpful comments and advice.

References
Aghion, P., and P. Bolton, "An Incomplete
Contract Approach to Financial Contracting,"
Review of Economic Studies, July 1992, 59,
473–94.
Abreu, D., D. Pearce, and E. Stacchetti,
"Toward a Theory of Discounted Repeated
Games with Imperfect Monitoring," Econometrica, September 1990, 58:5, 1041–63.
Aumann, R., and L. Shapley, "Long-Term
Competition and Game-Theoretic Analysis,"
mimeo, 1976.
Benoit, J-P., and V. Krishna, "Finitely Repeated Games," Econometrica, July 1985, 53:4,
905–22.
Berkes, F., "Local-level Management and

the Commons Problem: A Comparative Study
of Turkish Coastal Fisheries," Marine Policy,
1986, 10, 215–29.
Berkes, F., Common Property Resources. London: Belhaven Press, 1989.
Casson, M., The Economics of Business Culture. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.
Chopra, K., G. Kadekodi, and M. Murty,
"People's Participation and Common Property Resources," Economic and Political Weekly,
November 23–30, 1989, 24, A-189–95.
Crawford, V., and H. Haller, "Learning
How to Cooperate: Optimal Play in Repeated
Coordination Games," Econometrica, May 1990,
571–96.

134

Journal of Economic Perspectives

Dasgupta, P., "Trust as a Commodity." In
Gambetta, D., ed., Trust. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press, 1988, 42–72.
DeAngelo, H., "Competition and Unanimity," American Economic Review, March 1981,
71:1, 18–27.
Dewatripont, M., and J. Tirole, "A Theory
of Debt and Equity: Diversity of Securities and
Manager-Shareholder Congruence," IDEI,
University of Toulouse, mimeo, 1992.
Dutta, P., and R. Sundaram, "The Tragedy
of the Commons?," Economic Theory, 1993, 3,
413–26.
Feeny, D., F. Berkes, B. McCay, and J.
Acheson, "The Tragedy of the Commons:
Twenty-Two Years Later," Human Ecology,
March 1990, 18, 1–19.
Fraysse, J., and M. Moreaux, "Collusive
Equilibria in Oligopolies with Finite Lives,"
European Economic Review, February 1985,
27:1, 45–55.
Friedman, J., "Cooperative Equilibria in Finite Horizon NonCooperative Supergames,"
Journal of Economic Theory, April 1985, 35:2,
390–8.
Fudenberg, D., and E. Maskin, "The Folk
Theorem in Repeated Games with Discounting or with Incomplete Information," Econometrica, May 1986, 54:3, 533–54.
Grossman, S., and O. Hart, "Takeover Bids,
the Free-rider Problem and the Theory of the
Corporation," Bell Journal of Economics, Spring
1980, 11:1, 42–64.
Hardin, G., "The Tragedy of the Commons," Science, December 13, 1968, 162:3859,
1243–48.
Hirshman, A., Exit, Voice & Loyalty. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1970.
Jensen, M., and W. H. Meckling, "Theory
of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal of
Financial Economists, October 1976, 3:4,
305–60.
Kreps, D., "Corporate Culture and Economic Theory." In Alt, J., and K. Shepsle,
eds., Perspectives on Positive Political Economy.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press,
1990, 90–143.
Kreps, D., P. Milgrom, J. Roberts, and R.

Wilson, "Rational Co-operation in the Finitely
Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma," Journal of Economic Theory, August 1982, 27:2, 245–52.
McCloskey, Donald, "English Open Fields
as Behavior Towards Risk," Research in Economic History, Fall 1976, 1, 124–70.
Milne, F., "Corporate Investment and Finance Theory in Competitive Equilibrium,"
Economic Record, December 1974, 50:132,
511–33.
Radner, Roy, "Collusive Behavior in Noncooperative Epsilon-Equilibria of Oligopolies
with Long but Finite Lives," Journal of Economic Theory, April 1980, 22:2, 136–54.
Rubinstein, A., "Equilibrium in SuperGame," discussion paper, Centre for Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 1976.
Runge, C., "Common Property and Collective Action in Economic Development," World
Development, May 1986, 14:5, 623–35.
Sabourian, H., "Repeated Games: A
Survey," In Hahn, F., ed., The Economics of
Missing Markets, Information and Games. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1990, 62–105.
Seabright, P., "Is Cooperation HabitForming?" In Dasgupta, P., and K.-G. Maler,
eds., The Environment and Emerging Development
Issues. Oxford, Clarendon Press, forthcoming.
Shleifer, A., and L. Summers, "Breaches of
Trust in Hostile Takeovers." In Auerbach, A.,
ed., Corporate Takeovers: Cause and Consequences. Chicago, University of Chicago Press,
1988, 33–56.
Stevenson, G., Common Property Economics—
A General Theory and Land Use Applications.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press,
1991.
Swanson, T., "Regulating Endangered
Species," Economic Policy, April 1993, 16,
183–205.
Tirole, J., "A Theory of Collective Reputations, With Applications to the Persistence of
Corruption and to Firm Quality," IDEI, University of Toulouse, mimeo, 1993.
Weitzman, M., "Prices vs. Quantities," Review of Economic Studies, October 1974, 41:4,
447–91.

This article has been cited by:
1. Francisco M. Barba, Dany Jaimovich. 2022. Ethnic diversity and forest commons. World Development
158, 105986. [Crossref]
2. Izzy Gainsburg, Shiva Pauer, Nawal Abboub, Eamon T. Aloyo, Jean-Christophe Mourrat, Alejandrina
Cristia. 2022. How Effective Altruism Can Help Psychologists Maximize Their Impact. Perspectives
on Psychological Science 60, 174569162210795. [Crossref]
3. Laurent Lehmann, Simon T. Powers, Carel P. van Schaik. 2022. Four levers of reciprocity across
human societies: concepts, analysis and predictions. Evolutionary Human Sciences 4. . [Crossref]
4. Agustín Sánchez-Arcilla, Vicente Gracia, César Mösso, Iván Cáceres, Daniel González-Marco, Jesús
Gómez. 2021. Coastal Adaptation and Uncertainties: The Need of Ethics for a Shared Coastal Future.
Frontiers in Marine Science 8. . [Crossref]
5. Li Chen. 2021. Investigating the Impact of Competition and Incentive Design on Performance of
Crowdfunding Projects: A Case of Independent Movies. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic
Commerce Research 16:4, 791-810. [Crossref]
6. Zhu Dongliang. 2021. Farmers Are Growing Further and Further from the Land: Land Transfer and
the Practice of Three Rights Separation in China. Social Sciences in China 42:2, 24-43. [Crossref]
7. Jean Hugues Nlom. 2021. A Bio-Economic Analysis of Conflicts between Illegal Hunting and
Wildlife Management in Cameroon: The Case of Campo-Ma’an National Park. Journal for Nature
Conservation 23, 126003. [Crossref]
8. Andrea Salustri. 2021. Social and solidarity economy and social and solidarity commons: Towards
the (re)discovery of an ethic of the common good?. Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics 92:1,
13-32. [Crossref]
9. Shafiqul Islam, Khondker Mohammad Zobair, Cordia Chu, James C. R. Smart, Md Samsul Alam.
2021. Do Political Economy Factors Influence Funding Allocations for Disaster Risk Reduction?.
Journal of Risk and Financial Management 14:2, 85. [Crossref]
10. Martin Elvis, Alanna Krolikowski, Tony Milligan. 2021. Concentrated lunar resources: imminent
implications for governance and justice. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences 379:2188, 20190563. [Crossref]
11. Indranil De, Shyam Singh, Shilpi Smita Panda. Understanding Social Norms 21-36. [Crossref]
12. Fijnanda van Klingeren. 2020. Playing nice in the sandbox: On the role of heterogeneity, trust and
cooperation in common-pool resources. PLOS ONE 15:8, e0237870. [Crossref]
13. Tobias Baumann, Thore Graepel, John Shawe-Taylor. Adaptive Mechanism Design: Learning to
Promote Cooperation 1-7. [Crossref]
14. Nobuyoshi Yasunaga. 2020. Classification of collective actions for rural community vitalization in
Chugoku Mountainous region, Japan: applying multiple correspondence analysis. Asia-Pacific Journal
of Regional Science 4:2, 553-592. [Crossref]
15. Remi Bazillier, Victoire Girard. 2020. The gold digger and the machine. Evidence on the distributive
effect of the artisanal and industrial gold rushes in Burkina Faso. Journal of Development Economics
143, 102411. [Crossref]
16. Mateus Cesar, Ivette Luna, Ellie Perkins. 2020. De tragédia a solução: a atualidade teórica e empírica
dos recursos comuns no Brasil. Nova Economia 30:1, 7-35. [Crossref]
17. Bimbika Sijapati Basnett, Rodd Myers, Marlène Elias. SDG 10: Reduced Inequalities – An
Environmental Justice Perspective on Implications for Forests and People 315-348. [Crossref]

18. Ariel Singerman, Pilar Useche. 2019. The Role of Strategic Uncertainty in Area‐wide Pest
Management Decisions of Florida Citrus Growers. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 101:4,
991-1011. [Crossref]
19. Ariel Singerman, Pilar Useche. 2019. “The Role of Strategic Uncertainty in Area‐Wide Pest
Management Decisions of Florida Citrus Growers” – Authors' Response to Comment. American
Journal of Agricultural Economics 101:4, 1017-1020. [Crossref]
20. Syed Muhammad Khair, Shahbaz Mushtaq, Kate Reardon-Smith, Jenny Ostini. 2019. Diverse drivers
of unsustainable groundwater extraction behaviour operate in an unregulated water scarce region.
Journal of Environmental Management 236, 340-350. [Crossref]
21. Satyapriya Rout. 2018. Sustaining Southeast Asia’s Forests: Community, Institution and Forest
Governance in Thailand. Millennial Asia 9:2, 140-161. [Crossref]
22. Peter T. Leeson, Colin Harris. 2018. Wealth-destroying private property rights. World Development
107, 1-9. [Crossref]
23. Heather Marquette, Caryn Peiffer. 2018. Grappling with the “real politics” of systemic corruption:
Theoretical debates versus “real-world” functions. Governance 31:3, 499-514. [Crossref]
24. Maarten J. Punt, Justus Wesseler. 2018. The Formation of GM-free and GM Coasean Clubs: Will
They Form and If So How Much Can They Achieve?. Journal of Agricultural Economics 69:2, 413-438.
[Crossref]
25. Pranietha Mudliar, Tomas Koontz. 2018. The muting and unmuting of caste across inter-linked
action arenas: inequality and collective action in a community-based watershed group. International
Journal of the Commons 12:1, 225-248. [Crossref]
26. Gwendoline Promsopha. 2018. RISK-COPING, LAND TENURE AND LAND MARKETS: AN
OVERVIEW OF THE LITERATURE. Journal of Economic Surveys 32:1, 176-193. [Crossref]
27. Bishnu Pariyar, Jon C. Lovett, Carolyn Snell. 2018. Inequality of access in irrigation systems of the
mid-hills of Nepal. Area Development and Policy 3:1, 60-78. [Crossref]
28. Richard A. Aborisade, Nurudeen B. Aliyyu. Corruption and Africa 227-254. [Crossref]
29. Anders Skonhoft, Anne Borge Johannesen, Jon Olaf Olaussen. 2017. On the tragedy of the commons:
When predation and livestock loss may improve the economic lot of herders. Ambio 46:6, 644-654.
[Crossref]
30. Timothy J. Emery, Caleb Gardner, Klaas Hartmann, Ian Cartwright. 2016. The role of government
and industry in resolving assignment problems in fisheries with individual transferable quotas. Marine
Policy 73, 46-52. [Crossref]
31. Chang Yee Kwan. 2016. Increasing returns, individuality and use of the common pool. Australian
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 60:1, 97-111. [Crossref]
32. Madhusmita Dash, Bhagirath Behera. 2015. Local institutions, collective action and forest
conservation: The case of Similipal Tiger Reserve in India. Journal of Forest Economics 21:4, 167-184.
[Crossref]
33. Erik O. Kimbrough, Jared Rubin. 2015. Sustaining Group Reputation. Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization 31:3, 599-628. [Crossref]
34. Timothy J. Emery, John Tisdell, Bridget S. Green, Klaas Hartmann, Caleb Gardner, Rafael León.
2015. An experimental analysis of assignment problems and economic rent dissipation in quota
managed fisheries. Ocean & Coastal Management 106, 10-28. [Crossref]
35. Virgil Henry Storr, Stefanie Haeffele-Balch, Laura E. Grube. How Entrepreneurs Promote PostDisaster Community Rebound 33-50. [Crossref]
36. Nadine Finkbeiner, Michèle Morner. The Role of Conditional Cooperation in Organizing Change
49-63. [Crossref]

37. Archi Rastogi, Sneha Thapliyal, Gordon M. Hickey. 2014. Community Action and Tiger
Conservation: Assessing the Role of Social Capital. Society & Natural Resources 27:12, 1271-1287.
[Crossref]
38. Fekadu Beyene. 2014. Institutional arrangements in mutually beneficial grazing systems: an example
from herding communities in Ethiopia. Journal of Land Use Science 9:4, 438-452. [Crossref]
39. Hao-Chen Huang, Tzong-Huei Lin, Mei-Chi Lai, Tzu-Ling Lin. 2014. Environmental
consciousness and green customer behavior: An examination of motivation crowding effect.
International Journal of Hospitality Management 40, 139-149. [Crossref]
40. Shaila Sharmeen. 2014. The Politics of Irrigation. Journal of South Asian Development 9:1, 49-70.
[Crossref]
41. Suzi Kerr, Vicki Duscha. 2014. Going to the Source: Using an Upstream Point of Regulation for
Energy in a National Chinese Emissions Trading System. Energy & Environment 25:3-4, 593-611.
[Crossref]
42. Debnarayan Sarkar, Jhumur Sengupta. 2014. Structural versus nonstructural form of social capital:
impact of ethnicity along caste and religious dimensions in Indian context. Asian Ethnicity 15:1,
78-110. [Crossref]
43. Caroline Barratt, Edward H. Allison. 2014. Vulnerable people, vulnerable resources? Exploring the
relationship between people's vulnerability and the sustainability of community-managed natural
resources. Development Studies Research 1:1, 16-27. [Crossref]
44. Suzi Kerr, Vicki Duscha. 2014. Going to the Source: Using an Upstream Point of Regulation for
Energy in a National Chinese Emissions Trading System. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
45. Timothy N. Cason, Lata Gangadharan. 2013. Empowering neighbors versus imposing regulations:
An experimental analysis of pollution reduction schemes. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 65:3, 469-484. [Crossref]
46. Helen Suich. 2013. The effectiveness of economic incentives for sustaining community based natural
resource management. Land Use Policy 31, 441-449. [Crossref]
47. Fekadu Beyene. 2013. Multiple tournaments and sustained defection: Why do negotiations fail to
secure resource access between pastoral and agropastoral groups in Ethiopia?. The Journal of SocioEconomics 42, 79-87. [Crossref]
48. Pilar Useche. 2013. Collective Action in Common Pool Resource Management, Including
Heterogeneity of Opportunities and Exit Options. Natural Resources 04:08, 483-489. [Crossref]
49. H.M. Tuihedur Rahman, Gordon M. Hickey, Swapan Kumar Sarker. 2012. A framework for
evaluating collective action and informal institutional dynamics under a resource management policy
of decentralization. Ecological Economics 83, 32-41. [Crossref]
50. SUZI KERR, ADAM MILLARD-BALL. 2012. COOPERATION TO REDUCE DEVELOPING
COUNTRY EMISSIONS. Climate Change Economics 03:04, 1250023. [Crossref]
51. Hebin Lin, Kazuhiro Ueta. 2012. Lake watershed management: Services, monitoring, funding and
governance. Lakes & Reservoirs: Science, Policy and Management for Sustainable Use 17:3, 207-223.
[Crossref]
52. Manuel Pacheco Coelho, José António Filipe, Manuel Alberto M. Ferreira. 2012. Ethics and Natural
Resources Management. International Journal of Organizational and Collective Intelligence 3:3, 56-71.
[Crossref]
53. Peter Maille, Alan R. Collins. 2012. An index approach to performance-based payments for water
quality. Journal of Environmental Management 99, 27-35. [Crossref]
54. Jhumur Sengupta, Debnarayan Sarkar. 2012. Caste and religious diversity on formation of social
capital. Equality, Diversity and Inclusion: An International Journal 31:2, 158-175. [Crossref]

55. Jérôme Ballet, Jean-Luc Dubois, François-Régis Mahieu. 2012. La soutenabilité sociale du
développement durable : de l'omission à l'émergence. Mondes en développement n°156:4, 89-110.
[Crossref]
56. Suzi Kerr, Adam Millard-Ball. 2012. Cooperation to Reduce Developing Country Emissions. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
57. JASON SCULLION, CRAIG W. THOMAS, KRISTINA A. VOGT, OCTAVIO PÉREZMAQUEO, MILES G. LOGSDON. 2011. Evaluating the environmental impact of payments for
ecosystem services in Coatepec (Mexico) using remote sensing and on-site interviews. Environmental
Conservation 38:4, 426-434. [Crossref]
58. Stelios Katsanevakis, Vanessa Stelzenmüller, Andy South, Thomas Kirk Sørensen, Peter J.S.
Jones, Sandy Kerr, Fabio Badalamenti, Christos Anagnostou, Patricia Breen, Guillem Chust,
Giovanni D’Anna, Mike Duijn, Tatiana Filatova, Fabio Fiorentino, Helena Hulsman, Kate Johnson,
Aristomenis P. Karageorgis, Ingrid Kröncke, Simone Mirto, Carlo Pipitone, Susan Portelli, Wanfei
Qiu, Henning Reiss, Dimitris Sakellariou, Maria Salomidi, Luc van Hoof, Vassiliki Vassilopoulou,
Tomás Vega Fernández, Sandra Vöge, Anke Weber, Argyro Zenetos, Remment ter Hofstede. 2011.
Ecosystem-based marine spatial management: Review of concepts, policies, tools, and critical issues.
Ocean & Coastal Management 54:11, 807-820. [Crossref]
59. Tracy Yandle, Nadya Hajj, Rafal Raciborski. 2011. The Goldilocks Solution: Exploring the
Relationship between Trust and Participation in Resource Management within the New Zealand
Commercial Rock Lobster Fishery. Policy Studies Journal 39:4, 631-658. [Crossref]
60. YUKO NAKANO, KEIJIRO OTSUKA. 2011. Determinants of household contributions to collective
irrigation management: The case of the Doho Rice Scheme in Uganda. Environment and Development
Economics 16:5, 527-551. [Crossref]
61. Krister Andersson, Arun Agrawal. 2011. Inequalities, institutions, and forest commons. Global
Environmental Change 21:3, 866-875. [Crossref]
62. Rahmi İlkılıç. 2011. Networks of common property resources. Economic Theory 47:1, 105-134.
[Crossref]
63. Partha Dasgupta. 2011. Une question de confiance : capital social et développement économique.
Revue d'économie du développement Vol. 18:4, 47-96. [Crossref]
64. Elinor Ostrom. 2010. Analyzing collective action. Agricultural Economics 41, 155-166. [Crossref]
65. Fekadu Beyene. 2010. Interclan Cooperation in a Risky Pastoral Ecology: Some lessons from Eastern
Ethiopia. Human Ecology 38:4, 555-565. [Crossref]
66. Alessandro Gretter, Ilaria Goio, Geremia Gios. Beyond Commons: New Perspectives and Roles for
Common Properties 175-189. [Crossref]
67. Daniel H. Cole, Elinor Ostrom. 2010. The Variety of Property Systems and Rights in Natural
Resources. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
68. Mauricio G. Villena, Franco Zecchetto. 2010. Subject-Specific Performance Information can Worsen
the Tragedy of the Commons: Experimental Evidence. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
69. Lionel Richefort, Patrick Point. 2010. Governing a Common-Pool Resource in a Directed Network.
SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
70. Amy R. Poteete. 2009. Defining Political Community and Rights to Natural Resources in Botswana.
Development and Change 40:2, 281-305. [Crossref]
71. Diane Flaherty. 2009. Agency, History and the Impossibility Theorem: Lessons from Yugoslav SelfManagement. Science & Society 73:1, 118-130. [Crossref]
72. Jérôme Ballet. 2008. Propriété, biens publics mondiaux, bien(s) commun(s) : Une lecture des concepts
économiques. Développement durable et territoires :Dossier 10. . [Crossref]

73. Stephan Lorenzen, Rachel P Lorenzen. 2008. Institutionalizing the Informal: Irrigation and
government intervention in Bali. Development 51:1, 77-82. [Crossref]
74. Jérôme Ballet, Nicolas Sirven, Mélanie Requiers-Desjardins. 2007. Social Capital and Natural
Resource Management. The Journal of Environment & Development 16:4, 355-374. [Crossref]
75. Nori Tarui. 2007. Inequality and outside options in common-property resource use. Journal of
Development Economics 83:1, 214-239. [Crossref]
76. Nicolas Kosoy, Miguel Martinez-Tuna, Roldan Muradian, Joan Martinez-Alier. 2007. Payments for
environmental services in watersheds: Insights from a comparative study of three cases in Central
America. Ecological Economics 61:2-3, 446-455. [Crossref]
77. Jérôme Ballet. 2007. La gestion en commun des ressources naturelles : une perspective critique.
Développement durable et territoires . [Crossref]
78. Stephen C. Smith. Organizational Comparative Advantages of NGOs in Eradicating Extreme Poverty
and Hunger: Strategy for Escape from Poverty Traps 121-147. [Crossref]
79. Damien Sean Eldridge. 2007. Multiple Interactions and the Management of Local Commons. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
80. Jeena T. Srinivasan. 2006. The differential impact of user heterogeneity in resource management: A
case study from India. Ecological Economics 59:4, 511-518. [Crossref]
81. Jose Apesteguia, Frank P. Maier-Rigaud. 2006. The Role of Rivalry. Journal of Conflict Resolution
50:5, 646-663. [Crossref]
82. S. Kerr, K. Johnson, J. Side, M. Baine, C. Davos, J. Henley. 2006. Resolving conflicts in selecting a
programme of fisheries science investigation. Fisheries Research 79:3, 313-324. [Crossref]
83. Bhim Adhikari, Jon C. Lovett. 2006. Institutions and collective action: Does heterogeneity matter
in community-based resource management?. The Journal of Development Studies 42:3, 426-445.
[Crossref]
84. Pranab Bardhan, Isha Ray. 2006. Methodological Approaches to the Question of the Commons.
Economic Development and Cultural Change 54:3, 655-676. [Crossref]
85. Isha Ray. 2006. Outcomes and Processes in Economics and Anthropology. Economic Development and
Cultural Change 54:3, 677-694. [Crossref]
86. David Mosse. 2006. Collective Action, Common Property, and Social Capital in South India: An
Anthropological Commentary. Economic Development and Cultural Change 54:3, 695-724. [Crossref]
87. Timo Goeschl, Danilo Camargo Igliori. 2006. Property Rights for Biodiversity Conservation and
Development: Extractive Reserves in the Brazilian Amazon. Development and Change 37:2, 427-451.
[Crossref]
88. Masako Fujiie, Yujiro Hayami, Masao Kikuchi. 2005. The conditions of collective action for local
commons management: the case of irrigation in the Philippines. Agricultural Economics 33:2, 179-189.
[Crossref]
89. Nicolas Faysse. 2005. Coping with the Tragedy of the Commons: Game Structure and Design of
Rules. Journal of Economic Surveys 19:2, 239-261. [Crossref]
90. Pranab Bardhan. 2005. Law and Economics in the Tropics: Some Reflections. International Review
of Law and Economics 25:1, 65-74. [Crossref]
91. D. J. Knowler. 2004. The economics of soil productivity: local, national and global perspectives. Land
Degradation & Development 15:6, 543-561. [Crossref]
92. Suzi Kerr, Susana Cardenas, Joanna Hendy. 2004. Migration and the Environment in the Galapagos:
An Analysis of Economic and Policy Incentives Driving Migration, Potential Impacts from Migration
Control, and Potential Policies to Reduce Migration Pressure. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]

93. Timo Goeschl, Danilo Camargo Igliori. 2004. Property Rights Conservation and Development: An
Analysis of Extractive Reserves in the Brazilian Amazon. SSRN Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
94. Eirik Romstad. 2003. Team approaches in reducing nonpoint source pollution. Ecological Economics
47:1, 71-78. [Crossref]
95. Jeff Dayton-Johnson. 2003. Small-holders and Water Resources: A Review Essay on the Economics
of Locally-managed Irrigation. Oxford Development Studies 31:3, 315-339. [Crossref]
96. Elinor Ostrom. 2003. How Types of Goods and Property Rights Jointly Affect Collective Action.
Journal of Theoretical Politics 15:3, 239-270. [Crossref]
97. P. B. Anand. 2003. From conflict to co-operation: some design issues for local collective action
institutions in cities. Journal of International Development 15:2, 231-243. [Crossref]
98. David W. Carter. 2003. Protected areas in marine resource management: another look at the economics
and research issues. Ocean & Coastal Management 46:5, 439-456. [Crossref]
99. Sigmund Wagner-Tsukamoto. 2003. A Holistic Behavioural Economic Approach to Environmental
Problems?. Journal of Interdisciplinary Economics 14:1, 61-71. [Crossref]
100. Sunita P. Reddy. 2002. Communal Forests, Political Spaces: Territorial Competition between
Common Property Institutions and the State in Guatemala. Space and Polity 6:3, 271-287. [Crossref]
101. Daniel H. Cole. Pollution and Property 14, . [Crossref]
102. Jongwook Kim, Joseph T. Mahoney. 2002. Resource-based and property rights perspectives on
value creation: the case of oil field unitization. Managerial and Decision Economics 23:4-5, 225-245.
[Crossref]
103. Isha Ray, Jeffrey Williams. 2002. Locational asymmetry and the potential for cooperation on a canal.
Journal of Development Economics 67:1, 129-155. [Crossref]
104. Paul Seabright. Local Common Property Rights 1249-1252. [Crossref]
105. Alain De Janvry, Elisabeth Sadoulet, Rinku Murgai. Chapter 31 Rural development and rural policy
1593-1658. [Crossref]
106. Lubna Hasan. 2002. Revisiting Commons - Are Common Property Regimes Irrational?. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
107. Nancy McCarthy, Elisabeth Sadoulet, Alain de Janvry. 2001. Common Pool Resource Appropriation
under Costly Cooperation. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 42:3, 297-309.
[Crossref]
108. James M. Buchanan, Yong J. Yoon. 2001. Majoritarian Management of the Commons. Economic
Inquiry 39:3, 396-405. [Crossref]
109. Lubna Hasan. 2001. Analysing Institutional Set-up of Forest Management in Pakistan. SSRN
Electronic Journal . [Crossref]
110. Kevin Crean. 2000. Contrasting Approaches to the Management of Common Property Resources:
An institutional analysis of fisheries development strategies in Shetland and the Solomon Islands.
Australian Geographer 31:3, 367-382. [Crossref]
111. Jeff Dayton-Johnson. 2000. Determinants of collective action on the local commons: a model with
evidence from Mexico. Journal of Development Economics 62:1, 181-208. [Crossref]
112. Climis A. Davos. 1999. Sustainable cooperation as the challenge for a new coastal management
paradigm. Journal of Coastal Conservation 5:2, 171-180. [Crossref]
113. A. Asher. 1998. Effective and Ethical Institutional Investment. British Actuarial Journal 4:5, 969-1027.
[Crossref]
114. Jan Horst Keppler. 1998. Externalities, Fixed Costs and Information. Kyklos 51:4, 547-563. [Crossref]

115. GOPAL K. KADEKODI. 1998. Common Pool Resources: An Institutional Movement from Open
Access to Common Property Resources. Energy Sources 20:4-5, 317-332. [Crossref]
116. W.E. Grant, Paul B. Thompson. 1997. Integrated ecological models: simulation of socio-cultural
constraints on ecological dynamics. Ecological Modelling 100:1-3, 43-59. [Crossref]
117. Mokammel Hossain, Ana Doris Capistrano, Mahfuzuddin Ahmed. Poverty Alleviation,
Empowerment, and Sustainable Resource Use . [Crossref]
118. Nadia Cuffaro. 1997. Population growth and agriculture in poor countries: A review of theoretical
issues and empirical evidence. World Development 25:7, 1151-1163. [Crossref]
119. JAMES BARNEY MARSH. 1997. NORTH PACIFIC FISHERIES ENVIRONMENT:
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES. Contemporary Economic Policy 15:2, 44-51. [Crossref]
120. Paul Seabright. Transferability of Collective Property Rights: Does Trade Destroy Trust? 94-115.
[Crossref]
121. Omotunde E. G. Johnson. 1997. Cooperation, Emergence of the Economic Agency Role of
Government, and Governance. IMF Working Papers 97:150, 1. [Crossref]
122. Michael J. Keane. 1996. Sustaining quality in tourism destinations: an economic model with an
application. Applied Economics 28:12, 1545-1553. [Crossref]
123. Partha Dasgupta. 1996. The economics of the environment. Environment and Development Economics
1:4, 387-428. [Crossref]
124. Robin Mearns. 1996. Community, collective action and common grazing: The case of post‐socialist
Mongolia. Journal of Development Studies 32:3, 297-339. [Crossref]
125. Partha Dasgupta, Karl-Göran Mäler. Chapter 39 Poverty, institutions, and the environmental
resource-base 2371-2463. [Crossref]
126. Joshua Lyle Wiener, Tabitha A. Doescher. 1994. Cooperation and Expectations of Cooperation.
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 13:2, 259-270. [Crossref]
127. Jean‐Philippe Platteau. 1994. Behind the market stage where real societies exist ‐ part II: The role
of moral norms. Journal of Development Studies 30:4, 753-817. [Crossref]

