POLICY AND PRACTICE REVIEWS
published: 19 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2021.613285

Mitigating Bycatch: Novel Insights to
Multidisciplinary Approaches
Dale Squires 1* , Lisa T. Ballance 2 , Laurent Dagorn 1 , Peter H. Dutton 3 and Rebecca Lent 4
1

Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, La Jolla, CA, United States, 2 Marine Mammal Institute, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR, United States, 3 UMR 248 MARBEC Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Sète,
France, 4 Executive Secretary, International Whaling Commission, Cambridge, United Kingdom

Edited by:
Rob Harcourt,
Macquarie University, Australia
Reviewed by:
Rebecca L. Lewison,
San Diego State University,
United States
Sean Pascoe,
Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO), Australia
*Correspondence:
Dale Squires
Dale.Squires@noaa.gov
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Marine Affairs and Policy,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Marine Science
Received: 01 October 2020
Accepted: 04 January 2021
Published: 19 March 2021
Citation:
Squires D, Balance LT, Dagorn L,
Dutton PH and Lent R (2021)
Mitigating Bycatch: Novel Insights
to Multidisciplinary Approaches.
Front. Mar. Sci. 8:613285.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2021.613285

Fisheries bycatch conservation and management can be analyzed and implemented
through the biodiversity mitigation hierarchy using one of four basic approaches: (1)
private solutions, including voluntary, moral suasion, and intrinsic motivation; (2) direct
or “command-and-control” regulation starting from the fishery management authority
down to the vessel; (3) incentive- or market-based to alter producer and consumer
behavior and decision-making; and (4) hybrid of direct and incentive-based regulation
through liability laws. Lessons can be learned from terrestrial and energy conservation,
water management, forestry, and atmospheric pollution measures, such as the use of
offsets, tradeable rights to externalities, and liability considerations. General bycatch
conservation and management principles emerge based on a multidisciplinary approach
and a wide array of private and public measures for incentivizing bycatch mitigation.
Keywords: bycatch, biodiversity mitigation hierarchy, inter-disciplinary, conservation, regulation

CONTEXT: THE BYCATCH ISSUE
Bycatch refers most often to those species incidentally taken in fishing operations aimed at other
(target) species. Bycatch in this paper refers to species accidentally caught other than the target
species, brought on board, dead or alive, and that can therefore be either released alive, discarded
dead, or landed. Bycatch can be other finfish (including undersized target species), protected
species (fishes, sea turtles, marine mammals, and seabirds), live corals, or sponge reefs. We include
habitat impact (Holland and Schnier, 2006; Driscoll et al., 2017) with bycatch (hereafter simply
bycatch). Central to this paper is the fact that bycatch species and living habitats include vulnerable,
threatened, endangered, protected or otherwise emblematic species for which the take should be
minimized. Bycatch in this paper is extended to include habitat impact.
Economists classify bycatch into two types. The first type is non-target species that are
commercially harvested and receive a market price, but harvest is not at the ecologicallyeconomically optimum level due to size, age, or contribution to ecosystems. The market price does
not capture the full costs of foregone biodiversity and ecosystem services, including impacts on
population growth and food webs, because the bycatch is underpriced. Examples could include a
commercially landed fish species caught before reaching sexual maturity or a plankton foraging fish
contributing to the food web. The second type of bycatch is threatened, endangered or protected
species that are prohibited for retention. Examples include seabirds and sea turtles ensnared in
pelagic longline gear and marine mammals caught in drift gillnets. Because these species do not
have a formal market, the bycatch is ‘unpriced,’ even though the species do have non-market value
through their contribution to biodiversity, the ecosystem, and existence.
This paper, part of a special issue on bycatch and its mitigation, develops a broad-based
conservation framework and suite of policy instruments to address bycatch, drawn from marine

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

1

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

and terrestrial biodiversity conservation, pollution, and climate
mitigation examples. While the ecosystem approach to fisheries
has largely focused on harvest strategies, the future of
fisheries management will also benefit from the conservation
and regulatory framework described in this paper. Most,
if not all, conclusions on bycatch mitigation that have
been based on harvest strategies can be broadly applied to
environmental protection of living habitats and to marine
biodiversity conservation in general, and therefore, to complete
implementation of the ecosystem approach to fisheries. The
focus of this paper and the associated case studies pertains to
commercial fisheries, but when possible, artisanal fisheries are
also considered.
The paper develops this broad-based conservation framework
through three specific objectives. First, using the conservation
biology mitigation hierarchy as a broad framework, the
paper provides new insights into the suitability of the no
net loss objective. Second, the paper extends the previous
bycatch management literature by developing four regulatory
categories for fisheries bycatch mitigation: private, direct
regulation (top-down and command-and-control), incentive
(market-based), and hybrid. The previous literature, reviewed
below, largely focused upon reviewing different incentivebased approaches, overlooked private and hybrid approaches,
and did not establish a systematic, broad approach across all
four categories.
Third, the paper breaks new ground by developing the
broader context for the four regulatory categories that impact
the choice, design, and effectiveness of each regulatory approach.
That is, the choice of bycatch mitigation approach and
specific policy instruments within each approach does not
occur within a vacuum, but rather within a specific fishery
context. The type of fishery – gear, target and bycatch species,
fleet and vessel characteristics, scale of production, markets,
monitoring and enforcement capacity, quantity and quality of
available information, potential for bycatch-reducing technology,
transboundary species, regulatory and management structure,
and other factors affect the approach to bycatch management and
appropriate policy instruments.
The paper is organized as follows. Section “Mitigation
Hierarchy As a Framework” presents the mitigation hierarchy
framework, including discussions on no net loss as an objective
and bycatch mitigation impacts that account for impact equity.
Section “Basic Regulatory Approaches to Bycatch Mitigation”
presents four basic bycatch mitigation approaches. Section
“Incentive-Based Policy and Policy Instruments” addresses the
incentive-based approach, including pricing bycatch and direct
and indirect incentives. Section “Direct and Incentive-Based
Regulation” compares direct and incentive-based regulation.
Section “Interactions Between Private Solutions and IncentiveBased Policies” develops the potential interactions between
private solutions and incentive-based regulation. Section
“Broader Context Shaping Choice and Performance of Policy
Approach” develops the broader context shaping the choice
and performance of the different policy approaches. Section
“Equity and Fairness” raises the issues of equity and fairness in
bycatch mitigation.

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

MITIGATION HIERARCHY AS A
FRAMEWORK
Bycatch mitigation and the ecosystem-based approach to fisheries
management are more than biological and technical issues.
They also include modifying behavior and decisions made
by producers (vessel owners/operators and crew, processors,
distributors, retailers) and consumers to account for the
biodiversity and ecological impacts of their decisions.
The mitigation hierarchy (MH) (Business and Biodiversity
Offsets Programme [BBOP], 2012) provides an overarching
conservation framework for marine biodiversity conservation
in general, and is particularly useful for addressing bycatch
(Lent and Squires, 2017; Milner-Gulland et al., 2018; Squires
and Garcia, 2018; Squires et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2019a;
Arlidge et al., 2020b). The MH provides a framework for
defining measurable goals and structuring available knowledge of
potential management measures to achieve these goals (MilnerGulland et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2019a). The MH in the bycatch
context is as follows: (1) Avoid bycatch; (2) Minimize bycatch
when it cannot be avoided; (3) Restore or rehabilitate bycatch onsite when it cannot be minimized; and (4) Implement biodiversity
offsets for the same species and stock (or habitat) as a last resort
to address the residual from the first three steps.
The first three steps in the MH, generally implemented
in that order, constitute what could be called conventional
conservatory mitigation (Squires and Garcia, 2018; Squires
et al., 2018). They aim to restore the biodiversity to its predisturbance baseline or No Net Loss in biodiversity (NNL)
or any other agreed “healthy state.” (Here we abstract from
definition, measurement, and the actual baseline chosen,
including the issue of “shifting baselines,” Kahn and Friedman,
1995; Pauly, 1995; Papworth et al., 2009). Avoidance entails
measures to reduce the probability of encounter between
potentially harmful gear and potential bycatch by separating
fishing activity from individuals or stocks of concern (Arlidge
et al., 2020b). Examples include no-fishing areas, deployment
restrictions on fishing gear, and dynamic or static time-area
closures (Hobday et al., 2013; Kaplan et al., 2014; Little et al.,
2015; Maxwell et al., 2015; Lent and Squires, 2017; MilnerGulland et al., 2018; Squires and Garcia, 2018). Fisheries
subject to avoidance through time-area closures include the
Hawaii shallow-set pelagic longline (Curtis and Hicks, 2000;
Chakravorty and Nemoto, 2001) and California drift gillnet
swordfish fishery (Janisse et al., 2010; Gjertsen et al., 2014),
the tropical tuna purse seine fishery of the Eastern Pacific
Ocean (through “El Coralito”) (Hall and Roman, 2013),
and the southern and eastern scalefish and shark fishery
(Australian Fisheries Management Authority [AFMA], 2009).
Step 2 in the MH, minimization, reduces bycatch through, for
example, reductions in effort, technology standards, or bycatch
reducing technological change that alters selectivity. Examples
include use of circle rather than J-hooks with shallow-set pelagic
longlines targeting swordfish to minimize sea turtle bycatch
(Watson et al., 2005), bycatch reduction devices for demersal
trawl gear (Wakefield et al., 2016), nylon leaders for shark bycatch
in pelagic longline fisheries (Ward et al., 2008; Booth et al.,

2

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

and similarly, offsets are a public good that are provided by fishery
operators or other parties. A public good is one available to all
society without diminishing the amount available and is typically
privately underprovided since not all benefits can be captured
by the provider.
No net loss equates to an a priori level of social welfare, or
baseline, that only coincidentally gives NNL. Bycatch reduction,
or more generally offsets and biodiversity, is not only a public
good, but it is only one contributor to social welfare (which
accounts for all market and non-market costs and benefits
impacting society). For example, the NNL objective can lower
social welfare by not conserving sufficient bycatch if the bycatch
stock requires rebuilding. The NNL objective can also lower
social welfare if it restricts target catch to such an amount
that the foregone social benefits out-weigh the social benefits
of bycatch mitigation to NNL. NNL can also lower social
welfare when producer benefits are diminished due to lower
commercial landings. Whether net consumer welfare decreases
(from less consumption) or increases (from conservation)
depends upon society’s valuation of the public good component.
NNL can further lower social welfare if it constrains offsets
to a sub-optimal level (Kotchen, 1999). Both social welfare
and bycatch can decline when the NNL objective requires
unilateral bycatch reduction of a transboundary bycatch stock,
lowering producer and consumer benefits in the country of
regulation and shifting production of the target and bycatch
species to other, unregulated countries with higher bycatch
rates (Helvey et al., 2017). Such conservation, production, and
consumption “leakages” occurred in the Hawaiian shallowset pelagic longline fishery for swordfish when complete
avoidance (closure) transferred production to unregulated highseas swordfish fleets with higher bycatch rates (Sarmiento,
2006; Rausser et al., 2009). The increased production was
imported back into Hawaii as an inferior frozen rather than
fresh product, thereby lowering consumer welfare, and the
reduced Hawaiian catch and processing lowered producer
welfare in Hawaii.
The NNL objective and its implementation also implicitly
have distributive impacts that can disproportionately impact local
and lower-income fishers (Booth et al., 2019a; Griffiths et al.,
2019a,b). Avoidance, for example, can disproportionately lower
such fishers’ production, contributing to an inequitable impact
and lower social welfare, particularly if society accords such
fishers greater social importance. Compliance can then suffer,
and without sufficient monitoring and enforcement, bycatch
can even increase, or effectiveness of offsets could decline say
through lower local community monitoring and protection.
NNL can be subject to the requirement that people – especially
project-impacted – are no worse off, and preferably better
off, i.e., the Pareto Principle (Griffiths et al., 2019a,b). The
overall bycatch objective can account for fishers, especially
small-scale and lower-income, more dependent for income
and food security, to have a net negative impact on the
bycatch stock (satisfying no worse off), provided the gains
and losses across all fisheries combine to achieve the bycatch
objective (Booth et al., 2019a). An analogous issue arises
with MSY compared to Optimum Yield that also accounts

2019b), hook depth (Shiode et al., 2005), type of hook and
position of hook in water column for elasmobranch species in
pelagic and coastal fisheries (Afonso et al., 2011), Tori lines for
pelagic longline fisheries seabird bycatch (Gilman et al., 2005,
2019), the design of fish aggregating devices (FADs) to reduce
bycatch of pelagic sharks (Dagorn et al., 2012b; Restrepo et al.,
2017), or targeting of bigger tropical tuna schools (Dagorn et al.,
2012a). Other examples include use of narrower nets in demersal
gillnet fisheries to reduce sea turtle bycatch rates (Price and Van
Salisbury, 2007; Gilman et al., 2010) and longlines raised off the
bottom for sharks and rays (Favaro and Côté, 2015). Modification
to gill net size and tension can increase selectivity of certain
species and life-history stages with meshing and entanglement
(Thorpe and Frierson, 2009; Harry et al., 2011). Turtle Excluder
Devices (TEDs) minimize sea turtle bycatch by shrimp trawls
(Crowder et al., 1994).
In the third step in the MH, restoration or remediation
strategies facilitate live release of individuals, their safe return to
the sea, and their post-release survival (Booth et al., 2019a). For
example, line cutters to cut hooked sea turtles in pelagic longline
fisheries reduce post-hooking mortality (Gilman et al., 2006;
Gjertsen et al., 2010; Dutton et al., 2011). On-board handling of
caught elasmobranchs before return to sea (Booth et al., 2019b)
and at-sea release of dolphins while retrieving nets with Eastern
Pacific tuna purse seine vessels (Hall and Roman, 2013; Hall et al.,
2017; Gilman et al., 2019).
The last step of the MH aims to compensate for part or all
of the residual impact that remains after implementing the first
three steps by addressing impacts to the same bycatch species and
stock, either in the same ecosystem or in the global ecosystem.
Early discussion of fisheries bycatch and offsets are found in
Worldfish Center (2004), Wilcox and Donlan (2007), Dutton and
Squires (2008, 2011), Janisse et al. (2010), Pascoe et al. (2011),
Gjertsen et al. (2014), and Quigley and Harper (2006) discuss
salmon habitat offsets. Van Dover et al. (2014) discuss deep-sea
environments. Examples include protection of sea turtle nesting
sites (Dutton and Squires, 2008, 2011; Janisse et al., 2010; Dutton
et al., 2011; Gjertsen et al., 2014) and sea bird rookery sites
(Wilcox and Donlan, 2007; Pascoe et al., 2011) or purchases
of gear by outside interests for fishers to minimize bycatch in
fisheries from fleets outside the fishery subject to regulation
(Gjertsen et al., 2010).

Is the No Net Loss (NNL) Objective
Appropriate?
The MH aims for NNL or even a net gain in biodiversity, for
the stock or population of bycatch species. NNL is sometimes
Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY), which is often required
by law (Wolf et al., 2015; Squires and Garcia, 2018). In other
instances, some predetermined baseline serves as the NNL.
No net loss in the absence of a required MSY, however, does
not necessarily generate the optimum level of producer and
consumer benefits (hereafter social welfare) when biodiversity, or
more specifically bycatch and offsets, are considered as a public
good (Kotchen, 1999; Vicary, 2000). Just to be clear, bycatch
reduction is the public good that is provided by fishery operators,

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

3

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

are impacted by spillovers from the regulated fishery, such as
regulated fishers impacted by avoidance that now fish in another
fishery. In practice, the parties of concern may be limited to those
of the regulated fishery.
Social distribution weights for Party i, ωi , and equityadjusted bycatch mitigation and equity-adjusted hleast-cost
i

for the greatest overall benefit to the national economy and
considers qualification by relevant economic, social, or ecological
factors (OECD, 2006).
In lieu of NNL, the bycatch reduction objective can be
defined in net social welfare gain, population stability, population
recovery, sustainability or simply catch minimization, depending
on what is practical given budgetary and operational constraints
(Booth et al., 2019a). Much like Optimum Yield, the goal can
be further broadened to account for ecological factors, overall
social welfare, and distributional impacts on producers and
consumers. For example, a target or even bycatch species may
constitute the major protein source for low-income consumers,
and the impact of lower fish consumption can adversely and
significantly impact their diet, potentially require substitution to
higher-cost protein sources (if at all), thereby lowering consumer
welfare. More broadly, food security and poverty reduction (Béné
et al., 2016; Booth et al., 2019a) require incorporation into the
bycatch reduction goal, particularly in low-income countries and
with artisanal fisheries. An unanswered question, analogous to
single-species management, is whether a sustainability constraint
of NNL pertains to each species, in which case weak stockspecies management issues arise for multispecies (target and
bycatch) species.
In sum, NNL may or may not be the appropriate objective
for society, and each case under consideration requires weighing
the pros and cons for a bespoke approach. Moreover, the issue
is not just NNL “level” but the conservation method by which
it is achieved and the equity and fairness of the process and
distributive impacts.

bycatch mitigation are defined as follows. Let ωi =

η

for

Party i, where Yi denotes per capita income for i, Ȳ denotes
mean per capita income of all parties N, and η denotes a
progressivity parameter (elasticity of social marginal utility of
income). η > (<) 1 makes ωi more (less) progressive. Let Bj /Cj
denote the least-cost ratio for bycatch Bj in MH step j divided
by the cost of bycatch mitigation in step j Cj , where the ratio is
equalized across steps for least-cost bycatch mitigation: Bj /Cj =
Bk /C
 k j, k = 1, 2, 3, 4, j 6 = k (Squires and Garcia, 2018). Then,
ωi Bj /Cj gives greater weight to least-cost bycatch reduction
for income groups in step j in which  Yi < Ȳ. Equalizing
across all four steps j, k, j 6 = k, gives: ωi Bj /Cj = ωi [Bk /Ck ]
Without least-cost consideration, bycatch mitigation with equity
consideration for lower-income or close proximity groups, as in
Griffiths et al. (2019a,b) is ωi B, where here B denotes biodiversity
impacts in general.

Offsets
Offsets, when applied prior to the final residual step of the MH,
are a public good (Kotchen, 1999) that become an incentivebased policy substitute for avoidance and minimization (Lent
and Squires, 2017; Squires and Garcia, 2018; Squires et al.,
2018; Milner-Gulland et al., 2018). For eligible species, offsets
can be used as an incentive-based policy instrument earlier
in the mitigation hierarchy to compensate for any negative
impacts through off-site conservation actions that improve
the status of the affected bycatch (same species and stock)
elsewhere. Bycatch mitigation costs should fall, freeing up scarce
conservation budgets for other needs, or benefitting fishers
as the foregone target catch and revenues should fall as less
avoidance may be required.

Least-Cost Bycatch Reduction
Least cost or cost-effective bycatch reduction minimizes the
cost of a given level of bycatch reduction (Dutton and Squires,
2008; Gjertsen et al., 2010, 2014; Pascoe et al., 2010, 2011;
Gjertsen, 2011; Innes et al., 2015; Lent and Squires, 2017; Squires
and Garcia, 2018; Squires et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2019a;
Arlidge et al., 2020b). It can be extended to the entire MH
(Squires and Garcia, 2018; Squires et al., 2018; Booth et al.,
2019a; Arlidge et al., 2020a,b). The least-cost MH minimizes
costs across and within MH steps and bycatch reduction
channels. The least-cost MH allows the maximum possible
bycatch reduction for a given conservation budget and mitigates
fisheries bycatch consistent with given targets, guidance in the
Law of the Sea, Regional Fisheries Management Organizations,
national fishery management authorities, and measures under
the Convention on Biological Diversity. Through least-cost
implementation, the MH also enables socioeconomic trade-offs
to be explicitly incorporated into decisions (Squires and Garcia,
2018; Booth et al., 2019a).

BASIC REGULATORY APPROACHES TO
BYCATCH MITIGATION
The fundamental regulatory approach to bycatch mitigation, and
biodiversity conservation in general, through the MH may be
binned into four general categories:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Equitable Bycatch Reduction

Private solutions;
Direct regulation;
Incentive-based measures;
Hybrid solutions.

Each of these approaches will be explored in turn in
the sections below.

Bycatch reduction can be extended to account for equity through
the use of social distribution (welfare) weights ωi (Little and
Mirrlees, 1974). In principle, the relevant parties are not just those
regulated but all parties that are impacted, such as low-income
consumers deprived of a food source and food security. Impacted
parties also include fishers outside of the regulated fishery that

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Ȳ
Yi

Private Solutions
Private solutions include voluntary and private negotiation
between producers incurring bycatch and other private parties,

4

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

Social norms may impact compliance to bycatch regulation,
whether direct or incentive-based.1 Bycatch-regulated vessels
may be motivated to comply with regulations, and even to go
beyond literal compliance, not only fear of legal sanctions but
also by social pressures and norms. (See Thornton et al., 2009 for
trucking). Along similar lines, voluntary bycatch reduction may
arise due to credible regulatory threats, but additional compliance
may arise due to social norms. Larger and more commercialized
seafood firms may respond more positively to bycatch regulation
than small firms, since they are more visible and more closely
scrutinized by regulators, consumers, and advocacy groups and
are more concerned with brand and social reputation.

intrinsic motivation, and moral suasion. Intrinsic motivation
refers to behavior/activity coming from within the person for
its own sake rather than the desire for some external reward.
Intrinsic motivation contrasts with extrinsic motivation, which
is engaging in a behavior in order to earn external rewards
or avoid punishments (Gneezy et al., 2011; Young, 2015).
Intrinsic motivation includes social and personal norms of
conservation and altruism.
Moral suasion can be an important instrument to align
individual and public interests (Romans, 1966). Monetary
costs of moral suasion are typically small, they are quickly
implemented, and can complement economic incentives or
direct regulation (Bos et al., 2020). By affecting social norms or
adherence to them, moral suasion is expected to contribute to
bycatch reduction and to increase compliance.
Examples include negotiations and voluntary agreements
such as the United States west coast groundfish fishery case
discussed below. [See Gneezy et al. (2011), Bowles and PolaníaReyes (2012), Kotchen (2013), Segerson (2010, 2013), Young
(2015), and Farrow et al. (2017) for general discussions
of voluntary and private environmental regulation]. Credible
threats, such as formal public regulation, can incentivize
voluntary bycatch reduction (Segerson, 2013). Credible threats
of embargoes and trade measures can also be effective,
such as with the tuna–dolphin and shrimp–sea turtle issues
(Joyner and Tyler, 2000).
Another example is the voluntary program reducing bycatch
of river herring, blueback, herring, and American shad in the
northwest Atlantic mid-water trawl fishery targeting Atlantic
herring and Atlantic mackerel through an industry, state
government, and university partnership (Bethoney et al., 2017).
Potential public regulation provided the credible threat that
motivated the voluntary program to stave off such regulation. In
the United States, a voluntary program facilitates the donation
to foodbanks of salmon bycatch in the Bering Sea–Aleutian
Island trawl fishery (Clucas, 1997; Watson et al., 2020). The
Alaskan groundfish fishery employs a voluntary program to
reduce halibut bycatch (Fina, 2017).
Bycatch policy can also be influenced by intrinsic motivation
that is inherent in societies, communities, and individuals.
Intrinsic motivation may be particularly important in economies
that are less market-centric and are more characterized by noneconomic relationships. Intrinsic motivation may be especially
important for bycatch in small-scale and artisanal fisheries. Social
networks can impact intrinsic motivation (Alexander et al.,
2020; Arlidge et al., 2020a,b). Social norms can be classified
as folkways, mores, taboos and laws (Young, 2008, 2015). For
example, customary taboos that temporarily close coral reef areas
to fishing have long been practiced in Solomon Islands (Foale
and Manele, 2004; Foale et al., 2011). There is disagreement
on whether fishing taboos (and customary marine tenure) are
primarily intended for management between social groups or
to sustain food security from fisheries (Johannes, 1978). Taboo
on a clan reef may be declared as a mark of respect for the
death of a prominent clan member, to protect sacred sites, or to
prepare for a feast by allowing the short-term replenishment of
fish (Abernethy et al., 2014).

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Direct Regulation
Direct regulation, also called top-down or command-andcontrol, focuses on mandating specific behavior through
standards on technology, process, and performance which
address in particular the avoidance and minimization steps
of the MH. A standard is a limitation on behavior on a
producer, such as a performance standard on the outcome of
production as with a catch quota or limit (Helfand, 2013).
Bycatch can be tackled through top-down, direct regulation
by a fishery management authority, government, or Regional
Fisheries Management Organization. Direct regulation can be
accomplished through combination of technology, process, and
performance standards.
A technology standard specifies bycatch reduction
technologies or production processes that producers must
implement for avoidance or minimization. Examples include the
prohibition of sundown sets to reduce dolphin mortality when
setting on dolphins to capture large yellowfin tunas in the Eastern
Pacific Ocean (Gjertsen et al., 2010; Hall et al., 2017), discarding
offal on the opposite side of the vessel from which gear is released
and required use of Tori lines on longline vessels (seabirds)
(Gilman et al., 2014, 2016), selectivity requirements for gear such
as mesh size, use of circle hooks with mackerel-type bait rather
than J-hooks with squid bait (sea turtles) (Kerstetter and Graves,
2006; Reinhardt et al., 2017), bycatch reduction devices on trawl
nets (Melli et al., 2020), and the use of pingers on drift gillnets
(marine mammals, sea turtles) (Gilman et al., 2010). Technology
standards may change as technology changes. One critical issue
with technology standards is that they tend to remove incentives
for fishery operators to find other ways to reduce bycatch and
they can also freeze bycatch-reducing technology in place.
A process standard requires that vessels satisfy limits or
conditions on the process of fishing to achieve avoidance
or minimization. Examples include bycatch avoidance
1

An reviewer suggested that the role of social license to operate can be included
in the discussion on intrinsic motivation and especially social norms. Bycatch is
often associated with reduced social license, which in turn affects social norms.
Social license (to operate) can be defined as existing when a project has the ongoing
approval within the local community and other stakeholders, ongoing approval or
broad social acceptance and, most frequently, as ongoing acceptance (Prno and
Slocombe, 2012). Social license thus constrains vessels and supply chain firms
to meet the expectations of society and to avoid activities that societies deem
unacceptable rather than compliance with legal requirements (Thornton et al.,
2009). The relationship between social license to operate and social norms is
complex and beyond the scope of this paper.

5

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

defining the relative standard can be uniform or differentiated
and can be adjusted over time.
In sum, regulatory policy instruments can be based upon the
state of technology, performance or outcomes of the bycatch
mitigation, or on the process of production, transportation,
processing, and distribution. Technology standards tend to
be easily understood and often are readily accepted. Processcentered policy instruments affect the choice and state of
technology and the choice and use of inputs in production.
Performance-based approaches generally provide producers
greater flexibility in meeting bycatch reduction goals than those
based upon process. Performance-based approaches tend to
create stronger and more direct economic incentives because
they directly address the desired policy outcome. Processcentered incentives are more indirect because only some of
the inputs and practices are regulated, and the relationship
between the regulated inputs and the expected outputs can
be indirect and more uncertain. Process-centered incentives
are consequently weaker because they are more indirect.
Nonetheless, performance-centered policy instruments may be
more difficult and costly to monitor and enforce than processcentered approaches, especially due to at-sea production.

through time-area closures, including Marine Protected
Areas (Di Lorenzo et al., 2020), such as the time-area closure to
reduce bycatch of harbor porpoises in the Gulf of Maine sink
gillnet fishery (Murray et al., 2000) and another that is aimed
to reduce bycatch of Atlantic cod and yellowtail flounder in
the Georges Bank scallop fishery (Keith et al., 2020). Limits
on vessel size or trip length or frequency are another process
standard. Dynamic ocean management, such as the Hawaii
Turtle Watch program (Howell et al., 2008), is another form
of process standard (Hobday et al., 2013; Little et al., 2015;
Maxwell et al., 2015).
A performance standard requires vessels meet a standard
to minimize bycatch, such as a bycatch quota, while allowing
the vessels to choose any appropriate method to meet that
standard subject to inherent legal limits such as in the Pacific
coast United States groundfish trawl fishery (Holland and Martin,
2019). New Zealand manages bycatch of Hooker’s sea lions
in the arrow squid trawl fishery through quotas on bycatch
(Bache, 2003). Performance-based permits are a related policy
option, involving issuing permits only to those who meet bycatch
standards (Gjertsen et al., 2010).
Standards can be uniform across all producers and consumers
or differentiated by types of producers and consumers.
Performance standards on bycatch, such as bycatch quotas,
may be differentiated by vessel size class. For example, in the
tropical tuna FAD fishery the major determinant of species and
size caught is vessel’s capacity (size and use of satellite buoys,
echo-sounders, and supply vessels) (Guillotreau et al., 2011).
Performance standards through avoidance can impact a broad
range of fleets, generating diverse responses through fishing effort
redistribution, such as with a closure of the United Kingdom
Exclusive Economic Zone for a diverse group of French vessels
(Dépalle et al., 2020). Another example is sea turtle bycatch
quotas for Hawaii pelagic longline shallow sets (swordfish) but
not deep sets (bigeye tuna). Differentiated standards can be
designed to more closely match producers’ ability to reduce
bycatch, and thereby could lower costs of compliance.
Standards can be absolute or relative (Helfand, 2013).
Standards are defined, either implicitly or explicitly, as a rate,
such as per unit of time, area, effort, or catch. If the measure
in the denominator is completely exogenous to the process,
the standard is absolute, such as an absolute limit on bycatch
or effort per unit of time (time is exogenous). An absolute
standard limits total quantity of bycatch. A relative standard,
also known as rate-based or intensity standard, is a standard
per unit of catch, bycatch, effort, habitat, or other measure
over which the regulated entity has some control. Thus, if the
denominator can be controlled such as bycatch per unit of target
catch or effort, the standard is relative and does not have a
limiting total quantity. A relative performance standard example
is bycatch per unit of input (effort), per unit of gear (e.g., per
thousand hooks), or per unit of target species catch. If a relative
standard applies equally to vessels of different sizes or for example
bycatch rates – a uniform standard – a relative standard will
require proportionately equal bycatch reduction from all vessels.
A differentiated relative standard distinguishes the standard by
vessel size class or some other distinguishing feature. The ratio

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Incentive- or Market-Based Measures
Incentive-based (also called market-based) measures place a price
bycatch and thereby give residual bycatch a cost. This bycatch
cost in turn is incorporated into the price of the catch of target
species and any bycatch that already may be sold (and hence
has an existing price). Pricing bycatch then increases the cost of
production, which in turn incentivizes changes in producer and
consumer behavior and decision-making to reduce the scale and
mix of bycatch (Goulder and Parry, 2008).
Economic incentives, increasingly used to address pollution,
climate change, terrestrial conservation, water, and energy
efficiency, have potential for greater application to bycatch
reduction and marine biodiversity conservation (Hall, 1996;
Dutton and Squires, 2008, 2011; Gjertsen et al., 2010, 2014; Pascoe
et al., 2010, 2011; Dutton et al., 2011; Segerson, 2011; Innes
et al., 2015; Walmo et al., 2016; Lent and Squires, 2017; MilnerGulland et al., 2018; Squires and Garcia, 2018; Squires et al.,
2018; Booth et al., 2019a,b; Arlidge et al., 2020b). As this
paper emphasizes, however, economic incentive-based bycatch
mitigation is context-specific in its design, use and effectiveness.
Incentive-based bycatch reduction can apply to any step of
the MH, including offsets to address residual bycatch after the
first three steps of the MH (Dutton and Squires, 2008; Pascoe
et al., 2011; Lent and Squires, 2017; Milner-Gulland et al., 2018;
Squires and Garcia, 2018; Squires et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2019a;
Arlidge et al., 2020b).
Incentives can be positive or negative. Positive incentives
reward producers for reducing bycatch, such as through an
ecolabel, or subsidies which can be cash or in-kind and direct or
indirect. An in-kind example is credits for days fishing or access
to areas closed to fishing if certain bycatch reduction measures
are implemented. Negative incentives penalize producers for
bycatch, such as direct taxes (Wilcox and Donlan, 2007;
Dutton and Squires, 2008, 2011; Gjertsen et al., 2010; Pascoe

6

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

who create the bycatch, must pay for the offsets. Conservatory
offsets, applied earlier in the MH than compensation, are
incentive-based (Squires and Garcia, 2018; Squires et al., 2018).
Payments for ecosystem services provide an example where
entities concerned about bycatch may be willing to pay those who
cause the bycatch to reduce their bycatch (Bladon et al., 2016).
The BPP tends to hold in international fisheries, since there is
no global institution that requires countries to reduce bycatch
(although a fleet’s government could require bycatch reduction
due to that country’s own, internal reasons).

et al., 2010; Dutton et al., 2011; Segerson, 2011; Innes et al., 2015;
Booth et al., in press) or in-kind and indirect, such as loss of
access to a fishing ground or fewer days to fish. Full retention
of bycatch forms an implicit tax, because it displaces target catch
and revenue (Chan et al., 2014). Tax receipts applied to further
bycatch reduction form a “double-dividend” bycatch tax (Dutton
and Squires, 2008; Gjertsen et al., 2010; Pascoe et al., 2010;
Booth et al., In press). As an example, the Federation of Seafood
Harvesters (FISH), the industry association of the California drift
gillnet fishery for swordfish, voluntarily initiated payments in
the Fall of 2004 to the Asociacion Sudcaliforniana de Proteccion
al Medio Ambiente y la Tortuga Marina (ASUPMATOMA), a
Mexican conservation group, to aid their Pacific leatherback
turtle (Dermochelys coriacea) recovery efforts (Janisse et al.,
2010). FISH financed the payments for offsets by a voluntary
tax. The three major United States tuna processors, operating
through the International Seafood Sustainability Foundation
(ISSF), voluntarily tax themselves US$1/ton of landed longlinecaught tuna to finance offsets for sea turtle bycatch (Squires et al.,
2018; Pakiding et al., 2020).
Individual transferable quotas (ITQs) for bycatch (Boyce,
1996; Bisack and Sutinen, 2003; Gjertsen et al., 2010; Hannesson,
2010; Singh and Weninger, 2014; Hall et al., 2017; Miller and
Deacon, 2017) are another incentive-based policy instrument,
where bycatch reduction and selling or otherwise transferring
ITQs confers a benefit and positive incentive through revenues
earned and buying ITQs to cover bycatch not covered by quota
creates a cost and negative incentive. Trade of bycatch ITQs may
be tailored and when applied to weak stock species each fisher
may be required to hold sufficient rights to cover any bycatch
(Miller and Deacon, 2017). An advantage to ITQs is that they
counter the “race-to-fish” associated with an overall bycatch TAC.
Incentive-based policy instruments can be a combination
of penalty-and-reward measures, a two-part policy instrument
(Fullerton and Wolverton, 1999; Segerson, 2011; Kotchen
and Segerson, 2019). A penalty (indirect tax), such as fewer
fishing opportunities for not avoiding or minimizing, can be
coupled with a reward (indirect subsidy), such as extra fishing
opportunities for avoiding or minimizing (Segerson, 2011;
Kotchen and Segerson, 2019). The penalty and reward do not
have to be equal (Fullerton and Wolverton, 1999; Segerson,
2011; Kotchen and Segerson, 2019). On average over time if
the penalties and rewards are correctly set, the quota should
just be met and penalties should just match rewards (Fullerton
and Wolverton, 1999; Segerson, 2011; Kotchen and Segerson,
2019). The Scottish credit scheme is designed to reduce cod
bycatch through a penalty-and-reward system of days (Scottish
Government, 2011). The Bering Sea pollock mothership fleet
employs a voluntary credit scheme to reduce salmon bycatch
(Mize, 2014).
A deposit-refund system for fishing gear and equipment,
which can reduce “ghost fishing” is another example of these twopart policy instruments, which can also address the uncertainty
about the bycatch reduction (Jensen et al., 2017).
Incentive-based policy can follow either the Polluter Pays
Principle (PPP) or the User (Beneficiary) Pays Principle (UPP).
Biodiversity offsets provide an example of PPP, since producers,

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Hybrid Solutions: Bycatch Liability
Bycatch liability is a performance-based hybrid of direct and
incentive-based regulation in which parties are held liable for
bycatch exceeding some baseline. Bycatch liability is typically
triggered in some period by an event or condition (Lodge et al.,
2019). Liability requires determining the damages that have
occurred, whereas most incentive-based policy instruments raise
the cost of bycatch by enough to incentivize vessel operator
decision-making and behavior to reduce bycatch.
Several key challenges arise. One is defining, measuring, and
monitoring the triggers with relative ease and low costs. Another
concern is the transactions and information costs of reaching
and enforcing agreements. A final issue is the burden of proof
that involves damage to a person, community organization, etc.,
establishing a direct causal link between their losses and the
resource user’s activities.
There are two general forms of liability: strict and negligence
based. A producer under strict liability is responsible for bycatch
regardless of the amount of care taken to avoid bycatch (in the
more legal sense of damage). A producer under a negligence
rule is not held responsible for bycatch unless the producer
is negligent in conducting its operations. Full compliance with
existing regulations can be considered de facto evidence of nonnegligence and thereby absolve the producer of responsibility for
any residual bycatch. The incentive, cost, and risk implications of
imposing liability for bycatch depend upon the form of liability
used (Lodge et al., 2019).
Strict liability, applying the PPP, holds producers liable for
actual rather than expected costs of bycatch (Lodge et al.,
2019). Under negligence liability, non-negligent producers are
not liable for any residual bycatch. This implied property
right, and the associated allocation of costs between society
and producers, contrasts with strict liability and implies
only partial implementation of the PPP. The scale and cost
of production and price to target catch for non-negligent
production do not incorporate the full social cost of production,
including the bycatch, which is similar to the outcome under
direct regulation.

INCENTIVE-BASED POLICY AND
POLICY INSTRUMENTS
Incentive-based bycatch reduction policy and policy instruments
create economic incentives to change the behavior and
decision-making of producers to optimally reduce bycatch.

7

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

full information about bycatch necessary to make decisions
that lead to the optimal level and mix of bycatch. These
costs are unaccounted for by producers and consumers, and
more generally markets and their prices. Without seafood
prices incorporating these bycatch costs, both target species
and bycatch are overharvested with excessive bycatch relative
to target catch.
Incentive-based policy reduces underpriced bycatch by
creating a market price for the bycatch that accounts for the
otherwise un- or underpriced residual bycatch jointly harvested
with the target catch. Fully pricing the residual bycatch associated
with the target catch increases the market price for the target
catch. This higher target catch price conveys information to
ex-vessel markets transmitted in full or in part through the supply
chain to consumer markets.
For example, a coastal community in San Jose, northern
Peru, has partnered with a local not-for-profit charity to address
problematic sea turtle bycatch through a trial community
management cooperative that includes pricing bycatch (Arlidge
et al., 2020b). The initiative intends to create direct incentives
for bycatch reduction by giving price premiums to fish caught by
vessels that follow best-practice bycatch reduction guidelines.

Bycatch is reduced through altering both the bycatch-target
species catch ratio (substitution effect, mix) and scale of
production that reduces both bycatch and target species catch
(scale effect). Incentive-based approaches similarly alter the
behavior and decision-making of producers in the supply chain
and consumers in terms of the mix and scale of species to process,
distribute, and consume. Over a longer period, such incentivebased approaches also generate “dynamic” incentives to create,
diffuse, and adopt technology that lowers bycatch relative to
target catch, i.e., to increase the selectivity of fishing.
Incentive-based approaches offer a number of other
advantages (Gjertsen et al., 2010; Pascoe et al., 2010; Dutton
and Squires, 2011; Segerson, 2011; Innes et al., 2015; Walmo
et al., 2016; Lent and Squires, 2017; Miller and Deacon, 2017;
Milner-Gulland et al., 2018; Squires and Garcia, 2018; Squires
et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2019a; Lodge et al., 2019). They allow
vessels greater flexibility to devise solutions that creatively and
cost-effectively reduce bycatch. They also allow vessels to flexibly
respond to changes in market conditions, the environment,
technology, and resource conditions. They allow vessels to use
decentralized, privately held information that is unavailable to
the management authority. For example, vessels can use their
knowledge about the time of day and location of the bycatch
to adjust when and where they fish for the target species.
Bycatch ITQs in the United States West Coast groundfish
fishery led to fishers altering the deployment of trawl gear to
either gain more precise information on the location of bycatch
or to exploit the differential movements of bycatch species
(Miller and Deacon, 2017). Trawl fishers shifted toward night
fishing, a time when bycatch species migrate up from the sea
floor and thereby become less vulnerable to trawl gear, while
key target species remain near the sea floor. Trawl fishers
also shifted toward shorter tows to obtain higher frequency
information on bycatch, enabling avoidance through a shift in
location when a bycatch stock concentration is encountered.
In contrast, direct regulation tends to “bind up” or constrain
vessels, and thereby restrict vessels’ ability to respond to these
changes. This inflexibility tends to raise production costs, by
imposing uniform bycatch reduction regulations on a fleet with
many differences among vessels, captain and crew skills, and
in how they fish.
Individuals operating in groups of vessels sufficiently small to
devise and self-manage their own bycatch reduction scheme may
be more able to pool risk creating insurance programs which are
proven to be effective for voluntary approaches for addressing
rare and stochastic bycatch (Segerson, 2011; Deacon, 2012;
Holland and Jannot, 2012; Holland and Martin, 2019; Kotchen
and Segerson, 2019). These small groups have greater incentives
for vessels to work collectively on activities such as real-time
information sharing. Disadvantages include the potential for
free riding on bycatch reduction of others or they can induce the
“race to fish” as bycatch limits are met.

Direct and Indirect Incentive-Based
Approaches
Incentive-based approaches to bycatch reduction can be direct
or indirect. Direct incentives tie penalties or rewards directly
to, and conditional upon, verifiable conservation outcomes
(called conditionality) that otherwise would not have occurred
(called additionality). Examples of direct incentive approaches
include payments for ecosystem services (Bladon et al., 2016),
conservation easements (Deacon and Parker, 2009), taxes and
subsidies, biodiversity offsets, credits, tournaments and prizes to
incentivize bycatch-reducing technological change, and property
rights such as bycatch ITQs.
Indirect incentives are incentives that are only indirectly
linked to conservation in general and bycatch in particular
(Gjertsen and Stevenson, 2011). Indirect incentive measures
change the relative costs and benefits of specific activities in
an indirect way (Convention on Biological Diversity [CBD],
2020). Conservation per se is not directly tied to an economic
incentive. Instead, conservation occurs as a result of the incentive.
Individuals are not directly rewarded for pursuing conservation
activities or achieving a conservation performance/outcome, nor
are they directly penalized for degrading activities or failure to
achieve conservation performance. Indirect conservation uses
development initiatives and changes in business models, product
markets, employment, and income opportunities to encourage
local resource users to change their behavior in ways that lead to
greater conservation.
The two general categories of indirect incentive-based
approaches to bycatch reduction are: alternative livelihoods
(integrated development projects) and community-based
conservation (community resource management and community
conservation). Both may be especially suitable for small-scale
fisheries (Allison and Ellis, 2001). Indirect approaches may not

Pricing Bycatch
When seafood prices fail to contain information about the
unpriced or underpriced costs of bycatch, producers (vessels,
firms in the supply chain) and consumers do not have the

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

8

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

supports offsets (Pakiding et al., 2020). Improved nest protection
has helped optimize hatchling production, but local community
engagement, through activities that empower and enhance
quality of life, has been to the successful increases in hatchlings.
Community-based conservation sometimes is effective and in
other instances is not (Ostrom, 1990; Baland and Platteau, 1997,
2000; Berkes, 2004, 2006). For example, a widespread community
approach to mariculture and fishing prohibition failed to prevent
poaching within the mariculture ranch, because sanctions were
ineffective (Hair et al., 2020). A network of communitybased MPAs was established in the early 2000s to conserve
declining populations of bumphead parrotfish and other locally
valuable fish (Hamilton et al., 2019). The populations did not
decline due to sustained fishing pressure, poor enforcement
of community-based management measures, and loss of fish
nursery habitats due to logging.
Indirect incentive policies are potentially more sustainable
than direct approaches since they do not require on-going
financing, may be more consistent with social norms, may be
more useful when the bycatch problem is not well defined or
property rights are less clearly defined and enforced. However,
indirect incentives may be ‘one-shot’ in nature due to frontloaded benefits without conditionality or additionality, may be
in addition to rather than substitute for detrimental activity, and
have unintended consequences. Communities are heterogeneous,
and thus benefits and costs are not necessarily incurred in a
fashion that would foster incentives for all relevant community
members. This underscores the importance of front-loading
community engagement in the design and implementation of
alternative economic activities.

always specifically target bycatch but instead both target and
bycatch species.
Alternative livelihoods, such as ecotourism, direct people
away from the environmentally damaging activity and toward
an alternative with lower impact livelihood activities providing
at least equivalent monetary and non-monetary benefits (Wright
et al., 2015). As an example, community members may receive
wages as patrollers or rangers of sea turtle nesting beaches to
protect sites, where the wages provide on-going incentives with
conditionality and additionality (Gjertsen and Stevenson, 2011;
Marcovaldi, 2011; Pakiding et al., 2020). In some instances,
people may simply add the alternative livelihood to their existing
activities (Torell et al., 2010), precluding bycatch reduction.
Incentives are not necessarily created for the community as a
whole. A related approach provides capital or infrastructure to
the community as a whole, such as a school. An important issue
is whether incentives are on-going or one-shot and whether there
is conditionality and additionality. Wright et al. (2015) review
additional issues.
Eco-tourism, another type of alternative livelihood, provides
benefits to all or part of the community for preserving a
population, such as sea turtles. For example, the communities
of Kubulau district in southwestern Vanua Levu, Fiji, created a
network of 13 protected areas to address poaching threats.
Together with Moody’s Namena Resort, the Kubulau
communities enforce no-take areas against poaching to protect
important dive sites, using a surveillance system involving
community fish wardens. The system is financed through
dive-tag fees from dive-tourism operations, and the funds
are used for community-developed, tertiary scholarships, and
operational costs such as patrolling. Such broad-based programs
also provide protection to sea turtles and elasmobranchs that
can be subject to bycatch in other areas (Niesten and Gjertsen,
2010). The Misool Eco-Resort in Papua, Indonesia entered
into a 25-year lease with the customary owners of uninhabited
Batbitim island to establish a no-take zone that protects coral
reefs, sea turtles, elasmobranchs, and fish, protecting populations
of potential bycatch over at least part of their life history
(Niesten and Gjertsen, 2010).
Community-based conservation is based upon simultaneous
achieving successful conservation and development (Berkes,
2004, 2006). Community-based conservation is decentralized
and entails meaningful community participation in conservation
(Agrawal and Gibson, 1994). Thus, community-based
conservation ‘includes natural resources or biodiversity
protection by, for, and with the local community’ (Western
and Wright, 1994). Community-based management can take
many forms and involve many existing institutions. It is
also contextual and influenced by social norms, customs,
and culture. For example, community-based management in
the Pacific Islands tends to involve traditional institutions,
especially taboos, to implement spatial management (Abernethy
et al., 2014). Customary marine tenure, an institution, can
have flexible boundaries that can impact, for example, spatial
management (Foale and Manele, 2004). Community-based
conservation is an important component to leatherback sea
turtle nesting conservation in Papua Barat, Indonesia and

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

DIRECT AND INCENTIVE-BASED
REGULATION
Regulation can play a critical role in enacting incentive-based
approaches. Direct bycatch regulation, such as avoidance through
closed areas, or minimization through bycatch limits or gear
requirements, has a number of advantages. These include
the known impact on producer behavior if the producer is
compliant, low levels of risk for producers when the bycatch
management requirements are well defined and established, and
relatively low administrative costs if compliance can be easily
monitored and enforced.
Direct bycatch regulation as the sole regulatory approach
has a number of disadvantages that reflect information, cost,
and incentive compatibility issues faced by fishery management
authorities and producers. Direct regulation does not use all of
the information that can potentially engage bycatch reduction
options across and within steps of the MH. Direct regulation
largely uses the information on bycatch mitigation held by the
fishery management authority when in fact, producers hold
information, sometimes quite subtle and producer-specific, that
the fishery management authority does not typically know
and use. This information grows in importance as producers
gain experience, learn and adapt. Bycatch mitigation can
entail multiple, ongoing adjustments in fishing that are taken

9

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

and employ a variety of heuristic procedures to achieve outcomes
that are ‘good enough’ rather than truly optimal” (Conlisk, 1996).
Further, a range of emotional, social, cultural and cognitive biases
shape people’s decisions (Cinner, 2018). Another limitation is
the interaction of extrinsic motivation – economic incentives –
with intrinsic motivation, leading to crowding out, as discussed
below. Bycatch reduction is also shaped by social networks, trust
and social capital, local leadership and role models, governance
and institutional structures, social norms and peer pressure,
perceived legitimacy of regulations, perceived effectiveness of
proposed measures, and even the skill, experience and motivation
of individual fishers and captains (Booth et al., 2019b).
Economic incentive-based approaches may not always have
a substantial cost advantage over direct regulation if there is
little heterogeneity in costs among vessels. If incentive-based
instruments have only a small impact upon target catch prices,
then the failure to optimally exploit target catch reduction
channels (that therefore reduce bycatch) under direct regulation
may have little impact in practice. Instead, direct regulation that
is tailored to the heterogeneity, such as vessel size class or area
and time fished or gear type, may be superior. The relative
conservation and management costs of direct and incentivebased regulation can also tip the balance one way or the other.
Policy instruments based upon market incentives more
typically, although not always, create stronger bycatch reduction
incentives. In some instances, direct regulation can create even
stronger incentives but at a higher economic cost.

individually and may have varying and even small impacts at the
vessel-level but collectively can have a significant impact.
By not pricing residual bycatch, direct regulation does not
add the cost of the remaining bycatch to the cost and price
of the target catch (although the target catch production costs
reflect the higher costs due to direct regulation). The targetcatch price and costs will typically be lower than under bycatch
pricing, so that vessels are not incentivized to sufficiently reduce
the scale of production and bycatch-target catch ratio. However,
sufficiently impactful direct regulation raises costs by enough
to reduce the scale of production to the desired level (or even
below), although not in a cost-effective manner, i.e., direct costs
are unnecessarily incurred by producers to meet bycatch goals.
Thus, direct regulation does not impose responsibility upon
producers for any bycatch that might occur despite compliance
with those regulations. It implies only partial implementation of
the Polluter Pays Principle, since producers do not pay the cost of
residual bycatch occurring despite compliance. Direct regulation
shares bycatch reduction costs between producers (for avoidance,
minimization, and restoration) and those other stakeholders who
also suffer from the residual loss of bycatch. By failing to engage
all bycatch reduction channels across and within steps of the
mitigation hierarchy and across all producers and fishing areas,
bycatch will not be reduced in a fully socioeconomically and
ecologically optimal way.
Direct bycatch regulation does not generate any funds for
compensation of either anticipated or unanticipated bycatch.
Society instead bears the full cost and the full risk of any resulting
significant bycatch despite compliance. Vessel operators who stay
in the fleet are making sufficient profits to remain in business,
however, and consumers who can pay the higher prices are still
able to consume the product.
When costs of bycatch mitigation vary across producers,
uniform or “one-size-fits-all” direct regulation is not costeffective, because it does not create economic incentives to
meet bycatch mitigation targets in a least-cost way. The costminimizing mitigation approaches can vary by producer, who can
use producer-specific knowledge and methods. Direct bycatch
regulation that is differentiated by some criteria, such as different
limits according to vessel size class, could reduce the regulatory
costs to vessel operators.
Direct bycatch regulation can incentivize non-compliance due
to higher costs, with vessel operators engaging in actions to
circumvent these regulations and other actions that ultimately
hinder bycatch reduction and create economic waste. Finally,
direct bycatch regulation fails to incentivize producers to exceed
their regulatory requirements set through technology, process, or
performance standards.
For all these reasons, reliance solely upon direct regulation to
reduce bycatch is likely to fall short on several of the criteria that a
fishery management authority might use in evaluating alternative
policy approaches. Nonetheless, impactful direct regulation can
sometimes induce more bycatch reduction than incentive-based
approaches, particularly in time-critical situations.
There are also limits to incentive-based approaches due to
the assumption of purely rational behavior. Thus, “Individuals
may have bounded rationality, limited by cognitive resources,

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

INTERACTIONS BETWEEN PRIVATE
SOLUTIONS AND INCENTIVE-BASED
POLICIES
Economic incentives can interact with private solutions and
prosocial behavior, notably intrinsic motivation such as social
norms or altruism, in positive ways, called crowding in, and in
negative ways, called crowding out (Deci, 1971, 1975; Bowles,
2008; Gneezy et al., 2011; Bowles and Polanía-Reyes, 2012;
Rode et al., 2015; Young, 2015; Nyborg et al., 2016; Farrow
et al., 2017; Booth et al., 2019a). Economic incentives can
have two effects: the standard relative price effect that makes
the incentivized behavior more attractive, and an indirect
psychological effect associated with intrinsic motivation. The
total effect on behavioral intentions is thus comprised of two
effects either reinforcing each other through crowding in or
offsetting each other through crowding out.
Resumption of dolphin hunting in the Solomon Islands
after a conservation agreement between local communities and
a conservation group previously providing financial support
to develop alternative activities may be due to crowding out.
Villagers explained that stopping the hunt had brought much
tension in the village, and that resuming hunting brought
peace back among community members (Innes et al., 2015;
Oremus et al., 2015). Overfishing by rural communities in
Columbia regulated by a weakly enforced quota with a fine as
evidenced by a common property resource game with the local
population (Rodriíguez-Sickert et al., 2008; Velez et al., 2010)

10

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

across multiple parties and even multiple fishery management
authorities (Barrett, 2003, 2010, 2016). This broader bycatch
context is also holistic, extending beyond fishing interactions
with the bycatch species to its life cycle and geographic range.
Unilateral bycatch mitigation can be subject to a conservation
“leakage,” whereby the same bycatch population faces higher
mortality in another jurisdiction due to bycatch in a different
fleet (Mukherjee, 2015; Chan and Pan, 2016; Helvey et al., 2017).
These leakages may be accompanied by a trade leakage, whereby
the target catch is imported into the country unilaterally reducing
bycatch in order to fill the consumption gap of the target species,
possibly leading to increased bycatch mortality.

and a comparable field experiment by rural Cambodian villagers
(Travers et al., 2011).
A producer’s intrinsic motivation can change in response to
a change in external intervention, or a change in the perceived
nature of the task or in the producer’s self-perception. In
some instances, a large psychological effect can crowd out the
economically incentivized behavior.
Crowding out can operate through several principal channels.
One channel is information. The fishery management authority
(regulator) may be better informed about conservation goals than
the producer (e.g., owner and/or operator of the vessel, principal).
The fishery management authority, when better informed than
the producer, may choose a reward level signaling the difficulty
of the task and the producer’s ability to complete the task
satisfactorily, which could require additional economic rewards
to complete the conservation. The fishery management authority
may alternatively signal lack of trust in the producer’s ability or
willingness to reach a satisfactory conservation goal, which in
turn can lower intrinsic motivation.
A second channel for crowding out occurs when extrinsic
economic incentives reduce other intrinsic motives to conserve.
One example is the higher personal benefit to an individual
producer associated with a higher level of prosocial behavior,
thereby impacting the reputational value attributed to a
producer’s intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Decreasing the
signal about a producer’s prosocial preferences and increasing the
signal about a producer’s self-interest may result in lower image
motivation and impaired self-esteem. (Image motivation pertains
to the desire to be liked and well regarded by others and therefore
depends on behavior visible to others). Offering higher material
rewards may cause the indirect psychological effect to crowd out
the standard price effect, depending on the extent to which the
signals are public.
In sum, intrinsic motivation interacts with economic
incentives in complex ways that change over time. In some
instances, intrinsic motivation is more effective at reducing
bycatch than economic incentives. Carefully tailored incentives
can build off intrinsic motivation that enhances rather than
inhibits bycatch reduction. Incentive-based policy can reinforce
and shift intrinsic motivation by causing producers to first
change their behavior, then shift their beliefs to conform to
that behavior. The effects of incentives depend upon how they
are designed, the form in which they are given (monetary and
non-monetary), how they interact with intrinsic motivation,
and what happens after the incentives are withdrawn. Although
admittedly complex, the true cost of economic incentives should
include the adverse effects of any motivation crowding out.

Implications of Industry Size and
Organization
In commercial fisheries with reasonably strong and effective
fishery management, bycatch reduction depends upon
coordination and agency problems. Agency problems refer
to attaining compliance when the producers (agents) have more
information about bycatch reduction than the management
authority (regulator and principal) (Vestergaard, 2010; Jensen
et al., 2017). Coordination problems refer to coordinating the
actions, behavior, and decision-making of producers among
themselves and with the fishery management authority.
The effectiveness of bycatch reduction depends upon the
number of producers, the scale of the individual businesses,
and industry organization. Consider the different context of a
fishery such as the large-scale tuna purse seine and longline
vessels or Pollock or groundfish vessels in the United States North
Pacific or North Atlantic, and most coastal fishing fleets. Bycatch
reduction then also depends upon a comparatively strong and
effective management authority with the capability for at-sea
monitoring, control, and surveillance of catch or effort and
effective enforcement and with the capability of organizing and
coordinating producer behavior.
When there is a limited number of large-scale producers,
bycatch reduction is simplified due to the strong coordination
and lower transactions and information costs among and within
large companies or other strong cooperative arrangements such
as formal cooperatives or a mother ship and catcher vessels
(Deacon, 2012; Kotchen and Segerson, 2019; Aceves-Bueno
et al., 2020). This can lead to comparatively low transactions
and information costs within and between organizational
units and also with the fishery management authority. Lower
costs in turn allow bycatch limits to be allocated to the
large organizational units, which then self-resolve these
issues. With the resulting regulatory interdependency among
group members, when any member of a group contributes
to improved group performance, it generates benefits for
all other group members through penalty avoidance. The
United States Alaskan large-scale groundfish trawl fleet,
comprised a limited number of multi-vessel companies,
voluntarily reduces halibut bycatch through a co-management
scheme with the North Pacific Fishery Management Council
(Fina, 2017). Group approaches can also promote information
sharing, pooling of risks within a group, and reduce uncertainty

BROADER CONTEXT SHAPING CHOICE
AND PERFORMANCE OF POLICY
APPROACH
Transboundary Bycatch
Some bycatch populations are transboundary such that bycatch
reduction requires multilateral cooperation or coordination

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

11

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

absorbing and lowering the costs of information and transactions
of bycatch reduction, can also contribute to coordinating the
different vessels to meet bycatch reduction. However, NGOs can
also raise costs by introducing additional and heterogeneous
perspectives into the bycatch management process. In this second
case, there is a well-developed tool kit of policy instruments that
can be applied, many of them incentive-based, as discussed in
the next section.
In sum, the choice of regulatory approach and policy
instruments depends, in part, upon the number of vessels or
firms, their scale of production, and how the industry is organized
(including cooperatives and centralized industry groups). The
fishery management authority can often set a bycatch limit and
a penalty for non-compliance (a negative incentive) or even
an in-kind reward for compliance, and allow the vessels to
self-organize, as long as there is sufficient monitoring, control,
and surveillance. Thus, private solutions, incentivized through a
strategic threat, may suffice.

(Holland and Jannot, 2012; Holland and Martin, 2019). Such
regulation has the potential to be voluntary, typically under a
strategic threat of formal regulation (Kotchen, 2013; Segerson,
2010, 2013; Kotchen and Segerson, 2019).
In such a decentralized system, control of catch, monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement is critical, such as through a basic
incentive structure. Such an incentive structure could include a
penalty of a lower bycatch limit for failure to meet the objective
or a reward such as a larger target catch or longer season or carryforward of bycatch limits from 1 year to the next (Segerson, 2011;
Kotchen and Segerson, 2019). The comparatively limited number
of organizational units lowers the costs of coordination and
reduces the agency (asymmetric information) problem between
the fishery management authority and the organizational
units. The larger-sized firms or organizations and fewer vessel
numbers means that these units can at least partially, if not
fully, self-organize and coordinate bycatch reduction actions
internally rather than relying upon markets and the fishery
management authority to fulfill these functions (Coase, 1937).
Such actions reduce the problem of differing quality and
quantity of information – moral hazard – that otherwise
occurs when producers only partially rather than fully fulfill
the fishery management authority’s intentions. Each party in
a “contract” has an incentive and opportunity to gain from
acting contrary to the principles laid out by the agreement. Here,
producers may circumvent bycatch reduction regulations by
taking advantage of loopholes or because the producers’ actions
are not observed or enforced.
When there are a large number of limited-scale producers,
collaborative bycatch reduction becomes more complicated and
expensive. There is also a greater potential for producers to fail
to fully reduce bycatch according to intent of the regulations
or the regulations do not completely cover all relevant bycatch
possibilities (i.e., moral hazard) (Vestergaard, 2010; Jensen
et al., 2017). The larger number of individual companies and
vessels increases the information and transactions costs of
coordinating the vessels’ actions among themselves and in
relation to the management authority. The vessels (which
include multi-vessel companies), to the extent they can selforganize through industry associations and cooperatives, lower
the costs and difficulties of coordination among themselves
and with the management authority, i.e., facilitate comanagement. Nonetheless, the management authority and
the regulatory structure must provide more of the coordination
and absorb more of the costs of coordination, monitoring,
and enforcement.
With more numerous small-scale vessels, the fishery
management authority must organize more formal, intricate,
and costly monitoring, control, surveillance, and enforcement
compared to the first type, due to the larger number and likely
greater heterogeneity of the producers. The asymmetry of
information between vessels and the management authority can
be sizable given the large number of spatially dispersed vessels.
Markets are used rather than transactions internal to firms in
the case of larger and fewer firms due to the sizable information
and transactions costs of coordination among the many vessels
(Coase, 1937). Non-governmental organizations (NGOs), by

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Information Between Producers and
Consumers
Information about bycatch is not equally available throughout
the supply chain. The quality and level of bycatch information
decreases from the producer through the processors, distributors
and on to the consumers. Adverse selection arises when any of
these involved economic agents has more bycatch information
than others but for its own benefit does not reveal it to
the other parties when entering into a bycatch reduction
agreement, such as unrevealed greater bycatch rates than other
parties and participating in a certification scheme. Moral hazard
arises when any involved agents do not fully comply with
say bycatch reduction requirements when it does not bear the
full costs of that risky behavior. This asymmetric information
does not allow socially efficient behavior and decision-making
for optimal conservation for parties farther from producers
(Vestergaard, 2010; Kotchen, 2013; Segerson, 2013; Jensen et al.,
2017). Thus, for example, consumers were initially unaware of
the dolphin bycatch associated with harvest of large yellowfin
tunas in the Eastern Pacific Ocean, and as a consequence,
continued to purchase canned tuna unaware of the dolphin
bycatch (Ballance et al., 2021). Eco-labels, standards, certification,
and information programs all intend to rectify this issue by
signaling information about bycatch, although the information
quality (e.g., distortions) can readily deteriorate and may
not even reach producers from consumer markets or higher
in the supply chain.2

Bycatch Reducing Technological Change
Bycatch-reducing technological change lowers the ratio between
bycatch and target catch to better achieve the avoidance and
especially minimization steps of the MH. Examples include
2

An anonymous referee noted that certification can provide a price incentive to
producers, but also provides a signal to consumers, affecting the social license and
thereby affecting the social norms in the fishery. In theory, with better information
between producers and consumers, certification may not even be necessary to
achieve this.

12

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

of pollock that can be harvested. Protecting Chinook reduces
the pollock catch, creating a high implicit price and cost (of
foregone pollock catch) to the Chinook population, an input.
The high implicit Chinook cost incentivizes innovation to
reduce Chinook salmon bycatch.
Another factor that incentivizes research and development
for bycatch-reducing technological change is the market size
effect, which occurs when new technologies have a large market
and more abundant inputs. An example is innovation to
reduce dolphin mortality in the Eastern Pacific Ocean, since
the target species, yellowfin tuna, entered into the large North
American and European markets for canned tuna and there
were abundant inputs of large yellowfin tuna (Gjertsen et al.,
2010; Hall and Roman, 2013; Hall et al., 2017; Ballance et al.,
2021). Continued access to these markets and their large volume
required innovations to reduce dolphin bycatch. Alaskan Pollock
also has an important market size effect given the volume and
value of pollock production.
Social network effects (value of product or service increases
according to number of others using it and social interactions),
ideas (accumulated and new technology) and knowledge
spillovers (new technology adopted by one fisher demonstrates
benefits to others), and social learning (individuals are influenced
by actions taken by others when information is dispersed)
can be important to the adoption of new technology (Arrow,
1962; Katz and Shapiro, 1986; Romer, 1986, 1990; Jones
and Romer, 2010; Squires and Vestergaard, 2013a,b, 2018;
Mobius and Rosenblat, 2014; Sorenson, 2018; Alexander
et al., 2020; Arlidge et al., 2020a,b). Technology can be
embodied in the physical capital stock, such as a modified
or new gear type (e.g., sorting grids for trawl nets), or
new methods of fishing (learning by doing), such as fishing
at different times of the day when there is less bycatch.
Social interactions, social norms, and the number of users
directly impact the type of new technology adopted and its
rate of diffusion and adoption. Network scale economies and
social learning create dynamic incentives that accelerate the
rate of bycatch-reducing technological change (Arthur, 2009;
Arlidge et al., 2020a,b).
Diffusion and adoption of new technology may be enhanced
through subsidized gear or preferential access to markets (Squires
and Vestergaard, 2013b; Eigaard et al., 2014). Governments or
producers in one fishery can subsidize new bycatch reducing
gear for producers in another fishery with bycatch on the same
species and population, thereby creating an offset. A commercial
fleet could finance the adoption of bycatch reducing gear by
a small-scale fleet with bycatch of the same species, thereby
reducing the avoidance step of the MH for the commercial fleet
and allowing fishing that otherwise would not have occurred
(Gjertsen et al., 2014).

turtle excluder devices for shrimp trawlers (Crowder et al.,
1994), sorting grids for groundfish trawlers or purse seiners
(Broadhurst, 2000; Misund and Beltestad, 2000), dyeing pelagic
longline bait blue, side-setting, and using Tori lines and weighted
branch lines that sink faster to reduce seabird bycatch (Melvin
et al., 2014; Gilman et al., 2016, 2020; Hall et al., 2017), the
Hawaii Turtle Watch program that provides information to
pelagic longline vessels on areas with sea turtle concentration
(Howell et al., 2008), circle hooks rather than J hooks to
reduce sea turtle bycatch encounter and post-hooking mortality
with pelagic longliners (Andraka et al., 2013), non-entangling
and biodegradable designs of [FADs used in tuna purse seine
fisheries reduce the entanglement of sharks, sea turtles and other
organisms (Moreno et al., 2016), and illuminating gill nets with
chemical or battery-operated lightsticks to reduce bycatch of
sea turtles, seabirds and marine mammals (Werner et al., 2006;
Wang et al., 2013)].
Producers, acting in their private capacity, tend to provide
bycatch-reducing technology at a level below what is optimal
to society (Romer, 1986, 1990; Squires and Vestergaard, 2013b).
This technology provision is subject to free riding – other
parties benefit from the technology without contributing to
the costs of its development and provision. This lowers
the incentives to supply, through research and development,
the socially optimal level of the new technology, can slow
the rate of adoption and even limit the diffusion of the
new technology. Governments therefore often fill the gap
(Jaffee et al., 2005). Technology policy seeks to induce and
finance research and development and account for the underprovision and free riding of bycatch-reducing technological
change (Squires and Vestergaard, 2013b).
Nonetheless, direct involvement by industry in research
and development and learning by doing does occur for
bycatch reducing technological change (Hall et al., 2000;
Gilman and Lundin, 2010). For example, bird-scaring Tori lines
for longlining, and the backdown procedure after dolphins
are captured, the Medina dolphin safety panel, deploying at
least one rescuer during backdown, and carrying specified
dolphin safety/rescue equipment for tuna purse seine vessels
to reduce dolphin mortality in the Eastern Pacific Ocean
(Hall and Roman, 2013).
Bycatch-reducing technological change (as a form of “directed
technical change”) can arise due to several factors (Acemoglu,
2002). The price effect on the catch side arises when the
harvesting technology has lower bycatch and the target catch
consequently commands a price premium over target catch
with higher bycatch. An example is pole-and-line caught tuna
compared to tuna caught using FADs, where the former receives
a price premium for little or no bycatch. There was a concerted
effort to ensure that price premium by informing consumers
and retailers about the difference between pole and line vs.
FAD-caught tunas. The price effect also arises on the input side
when there are relatively scarce inputs, and correspondingly high
input prices incentivize reduced use of this input to reduce
production costs. An example is scarce, protected Chinook
salmon that are bycatch to Alaskan pollock (Mize, 2014). The
regulatory limits on Chinook bycatch constrain the amount

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

EQUITY AND FAIRNESS
Different policies have different impacts upon equity and fairness
in both process and distribution (consequences), which in turn
can impact monitoring, compliance, and enforcement. Some

13

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

distributional consequences of bycatch mitigation policies.
No single policy approach or instrument is superior across
all possible criteria, and the choice(s) depend upon each
individual case. The “best” approach on paper may not be
feasible, and a “second-best” approach that is practicable may
then be preferred.
Bycatch reduction is comprised of multiple components
requiring specific regulations or policies. When combining
instruments, however, the fishery management authority
should consider whether the different approaches being
combined form substitutes or complements. Policy instruments
that are substitutes can create redundancies without any
bycatch reduction, which also raises costs and can even
be counterproductive. Combining approaches that are
complementary can lead to a better overall outcome than
use of a single approach in isolation.
Uncertainty and timing are typically underappreciated but
often critical to bycatch reduction. Uncertainty arises in
determining who are the winners and losers, which can delay
implementation of bycatch policy instruments until the results
are more clearly sorted out (Libecap, 2014). Benefits are often
more uncertain and enjoyed further in the future than more
immediate and certain costs. Uncertainty can lead to waiting
until more information is available before adopting incentivebased policy instruments or bycatch-reducing technology.
Compounding uncertainty over the size and distribution of net
benefits is the time of response for the bycatch population.
A slowly rebounding population can delay compensation or
rewards to fishers adopting bycatch reducing policy instruments
that have serious costs in foregone target catch and revenue or
have sizable costs in adaptation (such as fishing in another area).
Fishers facing immediate costs, such as vessel loan payments, may
not be able to readily adapt.
Designing and implementing workable solutions to
bycatch clearly presents a challenge for fishery managers
and stakeholders. Nevertheless, this work is critically important
as bycatch is a loss to society and in some cases, can cause
extinction. A multidisciplinary approach conducted in
collaboration with the fishing community can provide the
widest possible array of options for mitigating bycatch whilst
maintaining a viable fishery.

policies can more inequitably and unfairly impact all or select
producers and consumers than others.
The bycatch reduction policy process can be consistent
with principles of equity and fairness. Bycatch reduction
policy has distributional consequences, leaving some groups
relatively better or worse off. Policy impacts can be assessed for
consequences by equity metrics (Cowell, 2016).
The impact of differently designed policies upon equity
and fairness in process and distribution can affect monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement. Some impacts can be perceived as
inequitable and unfair if the foregone catch and revenue from
avoidance and even minimization disproportionately fall upon
lower-income or otherwise disadvantaged producers and even
some consumers. Moreover, benefits, whenever they are nonmarket and diffuse across a broad population or whenever there
are higher prices from eco-labeling, may not be transmitted
to these fishers. Low-income fishers then bear the costs
but do not enjoy the benefits of bycatch mitigation, which
can aggravate any inequitable impacts. The NNL objective
may also disproportionately impact local and lower-income
fishers and thereby contribute to an inequitable impact and
lower social welfare (Griffiths et al., 2019a,b). Policies crafted
using normative principles of equity and fairness and social
distribution weights can ensure equity and fairness in process and
distribution (consequences) (Young, 1994).

CONCLUSION
Bycatch reduction is not only a technical issue of harvesting
technology and biology, but also a human issue involving
behavior and decision-making by producers and consumers.
Bycatch reduction also occurs within the context of different
industrial and regulatory structures of fisheries, which in turn
can impact the choice of basic regulatory approach – private
solutions, direct regulation, incentive- (market-) based, and
hybrid – and then choice of policy instruments.
There is no single “best” approach to bycatch reduction.
The “best” approach almost invariably differs by the type
of fishery – the species and its life history, geographical
distribution (including transboundary stocks), and population
status, gear, vessel numbers and ownership structure, domestic
or international fishery, commercial or artisanal fishery,
the fishery management authority and its governance, the
importance of markets, geographical location, and legal
structure of the State or Regional Fisheries Management
Organization. Nonetheless, for commercial fisheries some
very basic and broad conclusions can be drawn. In contrast,
bycatch reduction in artisanal and small-scale fisheries remains
a challenging issue, in part due to its conflation with economic
development, and likely includes elements of community-based
and alternative livelihoods.
The mitigation hierarchy provides an analytical framework
by which to evaluate policies to mitigate bycatch. The least-cost
mitigation hierarchy potentially gives greater bycatch reduction,
especially when there are limited bycatch mitigation budgets. The
equitable least-cost mitigation hierarchy can explicitly address

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and
intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it
for publication.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The views expressed are not necessarily those of US NOAA
Fisheries, the International Whaling Commission, or Institut
de Recherche pour le Développement. The authors thank
Steve Stohs for comments but remain responsible for all
remaining errors.

14

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

REFERENCES

Berkes, F. (2006). From community-based resource management to complex
systems: the scale issue and marine commons. Ecol. Soc. 11, 45.
Bethoney, N. D., Schondelmeier, B. P., Kneebone, J., and Hoffman, W. S. (2017).
Bridges to best management: effects of a voluntary bycatch avoidance program
in a mid-water trawl fishery. Mar. Policy 83, 172–178.
Bisack, K., and Sutinen, J. (2003). Harbor porpoise bycatch: ITQs or time/area
closures in the New England gillnet fishery. Land Econ. 82, 85–102. doi: 10.
3368/le.82.1.85
Bladon, A. J., Short, K. M., Mohammed, E. Y., and Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2016).
Payments for ecosystem services in developing world fisheries. Fish Fish. 17,
839–859. doi: 10.1111/faf.12095
Booth, H., Arlidge, W. N. S., Squires, D., and Milner-Gulland, E. J. (in press).
Bycatch levies could reconcile trade-offs between blue growth and biodiversity
conservation. Nat. Ecol. Evol.
Booth, H., Squires, D., and Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2019a). The mitigation hierarchy
for sharks: a risk-based framework for reconciling trade-offs between shark
conservation and fisheries objectives. Fish Fish. 21, 269–289. doi: 10.1111/faf.
12429
Booth, H., Squires, D., and Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2019b). The neglected
complexities of shark fisheries, and priorities for holistic risk-based
management. Ocean Coast. Manag. 182:104994. doi: 10.1016/j.oceco
aman.2019.104994
Bos, B., Drupp, M. A., Meya, J. N., and Quaas, M. F. (2020). Moral suasion and
the private provision of public goods: evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Enviorn. Res. Econ. 76, 1117–1138.
Bowles, S. (2008). Policies designed for self-interested citizens may undermine
“the moral sentiments”: evidences from economic experiments. Science 320,
1605–1609. doi: 10.1126/science.1152110
Bowles, S., and Polanía-Reyes, S. (2012). Economic incentives and social
preferences: substitutes or complements? J. Econ. Lit. 50, 368–425. doi: 10.1257/
jel.50.2.368
Boyce, J. R. (1996). An economic analysis of the bycatch problem. J. Environ. Econ.
Manag. 31, 314–336. doi: 10.1006/jeem.1996.0047
Broadhurst, M. K. (2000). Modifications to reduce bycatch in prawn trawls: review
and framework for development. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 10, 27–60.
Business and Biodiversity Offsets Programme [BBOP] (2012). Standards on
Biodiversity Offsets. Washington, DC: BBOP.
Chakravorty, U., and Nemoto, K. (2001). Modeling the effects of area closure
and tax policies: a spatial-temporal model of the Hawaii longline fishery. Mar.
Resour. Econ. 15, 179–204. doi: 10.1086/mre.15.3.42629301
Chan, H. L., and Pan, M. (2016). Spillover effects of environmental regulation for
sea turtle protection in the Hawaii longline swordfish fishery. Mar. Resour. Econ.
31, 259–279. doi: 10.1086/686672
Chan, V., Clarke, R., and Squires, D. (2014). Full retention in tuna fisheries:
benefits, costs and unintended consequences. Mar. Policy 45, 213–221. doi:
10.1016/j.marpol.2013.10.016
Cinner, J. (2018). How behavioral science can help conservation. Science 362,
889–890. doi: 10.1126/science.aau6028
Clucas, I. (1997). A Study of the Options for Utilization of Bycatch and Discards from
Marine Capture Fisheries. Remo: FAO.
Coase, R. (1937). The nature of the firm. Economica 4, 386–405.
Conlisk, J. (1996). Why bounded rationality? J. Econ. Lit. 34, 669–700.
Convention on Biological Diversity [CBD] (2020). Indirect Incentive Measures
(Market Creation). Available online at: https://www.cbd.int/programmes/socioeco/incentives/indirect-info.shtml (accessed December 16, 2020).
Cowell, F. A. (2016). “Inequality and poverty measures,” in Oxford Handbook
of Well-Being and Public Policy, eds M. D. Adler and M. Fleurbaey (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), 82–125.
Crowder, L. B., Crouse, D. T., Heppell, S. S., and Martin, T. H. (1994). Predicting
the impact of turtle excluder devices on loggerhead sea turtle populations. Ecol.
Appl. 4, 437–445. doi: 10.2307/1941948
Curtis, R., and Hicks, R. L. (2000). The cost of sea turtle preservation: the case of
Hawaii’s Pelagic longliners. Am. J. Agr. Econ. 82, 1191–1197. doi: 10.1111/00029092.00119
Dagorn, L., Filmalter, J. D., Forget, F., Amandè, J., Hall, M. A., Williams, P., et al.
(2012a). Targeting bigger schools can reduce ecosystem impacts of fisheries.
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 69, 1463–1467. doi: 10.1139/f2012-089

Abernethy, K. E., Bodin, Ö, Olsson, P., Hilly, Z., and Schwarz, A. (2014).
Two steps forward, two steps back: the role of innovation in transforming
towards community-based marine resource management in Solomon
Islands. Global Environ. Chang. 28, 309–321. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.
07.008
Acemoglu, D. (2002). Directed technical change. Rev. Econ. Stud. 69, 781–809.
Aceves-Bueno, E., Miller, S. J., Cornejo-Donoso, J., and Gaines, S. D. (2020).
Cooperation as a solution to shared resources in territorial use rights in fisheries.
Ecol. Appl. 30:e02020.
Afonso, A. S., Hazin, F. H. V., Carvalho, F., Pacheco, J. C., Hazin, H.,
Kerstetter, D. W., et al. (2011). Fishing gear modifications to reduce
elasmobranch mortality in pelagic and bottom longline fisheries off
Northeast Brazil. Fish. Res. 108, 336–343. doi: 10.1016/j.fishres.2011.
01.007
Agrawal, A., and Gibson, C. (1994). Enchantment and disenchantment: the role
of community in natural resource conservation. World Dev. 27, 629–649. doi:
10.1016/s0305-750x(98)00161-2
Alexander, S. M., Staniczenko, P. O. A., and Bodin, Ö (2020). Social ties explain
catch portfolios of small-scale fishers in the Caribbean. Fish Fish. 21, 120–131.
doi: 10.1111/faf.12421
Allison, E. H., and Ellis, F. (2001). The livelihoods approach and management
of small-scale fisheries. Mar. Policy 25, 377–388. doi: 10.1016/s0308-597x(01)
00023-9
Andraka, S., Mug, M., Hallm, M., Pons, M., Pacheco, L., Parrales, M., et al.
(2013). Circle hooks: developing better fishing practices in the artisanal longline
fisheries of the Eastern Pacific Ocean. Biol. Conserv. 160, 214–224. doi: 10.1016/
j.biocon.2013.01.019
Arlidge, W. N. S., Firth, J. A., Alfaro-Shigueto, J., Ibañez-Erquiaga, B., Mangel, J. C.,
Squires, D., et al. (2020a). Assessing Information-Sharing Networks within SmallScale Fisheries and the Implicatons for Conservation Interventions. Working
paper, Department of Zoology, Oxford: Oxford University.
Arlidge, W. N. S., Squires, D., Alfaro-Shigueto, J., Booth, H., Mangel, J. C., and
Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2020b). A mitigation hierarchy approach for managing
sea turtle captures in small-scale fisheries. Front. Mar. Sci. 7:49. doi: 10.3389/
fmars.2020.00049
Arrow, K. (1962). The economic implications of learning by doing. Rev. Econ. Stud.
29, 155–173. doi: 10.2307/2295952
Arthur, B. W. (2009). The Nature of Technology: What It Is and How It Evolves.
New York, NY: Free Press.
Australian Fisheries Management Authority [AFMA] (2009). Southern and Eastern
Scalefish and Shark Fishery (Closures) Direction No. 1. Canberra: AFMA, 38.
Bache, S. (2003). Bycatch mitigation tools: selecting fisheries, setting limits, and
modifying gear. Ocean Coast. Manag. 46, 103–125. doi: 10.1016/s09645691(02)00123-0
Baland, J.-M., and Platteau, J. P. (1997). Coordination problems in local-level
resource management. J. Dev. Econ. 53, 197–210. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3878(97)
00008-4
Baland, J.-M., and Platteau, J. P. (2000). Halting Degradation of Nature Resources: Is
There a Role for Rural Communities?. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
Ballance, L. T., Gerrodette, T., Lennert-Cody, C. E., Pitman, R. L., and Squires, D.
(2021). Interdisciplinary Approaches to Bycatch Mitigation: Lessons from “The
Tuna-Dolphin Problem”. Oregon: Oregon State University.
Béné, C., Arthur, R., Norbury, H., Allison, E. H., Beveridge, M., Bush, S. R.,
et al. (2016). Contribution of fisheries and aquaculture to food security and
poverty reduction: assessing the current evidence. World Dev. 79, 177–196.
doi: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.11.007
Barrett, S. (2003). Environment and Statecraft. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barrett, S. (2010). Why Cooperate? The Incentive to Supply Global Public Goods.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barrett, S. (2016). Coordination vs. voluntarism and enforcement in sustaining
international cooperation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 133, 14515–14522. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1604989113
Berkes, F. (2004). Rethinking community-based conservation. Cons. Bio. 18, 621–
630. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2004.00077.x

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

15

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

Dagorn, L., Holland, K., Restrepo, V., and Moreno, G. (2012b). Is it good or bad
to fish with FADs? What are the real impacts of the use of drifting FADs on
pelagic marine ecosystems. Fish Fish. 14, 391–415. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2979.
2012.00478.x
Deacon, R. T. (2012). Fishery management by harvester cooperatives. Rev. Env.
Econ. Policy 6, 258–277. doi: 10.1093/reep/res008
Deacon, R. T., and Parker, D. P. (2009). Encumbering harvest rights to protect
marine environments: a model of marine conservation easements. Agr. Res.
Econ. 53, 37–58. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8489.2007.00429.x
Deci, E. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation.
J. Pers. Psychol. 18, 105–115. doi: 10.1037/h0030644
Deci, E. (1975). Intrinsic Motivation. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Dépalle, M., Thébaud, O., and Sanchirico, J. (2020). Accounting for fleet
heterogeneity in estimating the impacts of large-scale fishery closures. Mar.
Resour. Econ. 35, 361–378. doi: 10.1086/710514
Di Lorenzo, M., Guidetti, P., Di Franco, A., Calò, A., and Claudet, J.
(2020). Assessing spillover from marine protected areas and its drivers:
a meta-analytical approach. Fish Fish. 21, 906–915. doi: 10.1111/faf.
12469
Driscoll, J., Wallace, S., Turris, B., and Mose, B. (2017). Using Individual Vessel
Quotas to Manage Coral and Sponge Bycatch: The Case of the British Columbia
Groundfish Bottom Trawl Fishery. Presentation to Workshop on incentivebased bycatch reduction case studies, Sète: NOAA-IRD-Ifremer.
Dutton, P. H., Gjertsen, H., and Squires, D. (2011). “Conservation of the
leatherback sea turtle in the Pacific,” in Handbook of Marine Fisheries
Conservation and Management, eds R. Q. Grafton, R. Hilborn, D. Squires, M.
Tait, and M. Williams (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 195–204.
Dutton, P. H., and Squires, D. (2008). Reconciling biodiversity with fishing: a
holistic strategy for pacific sea turtle recovery. Ocean Dev. Int. Law 39, 200–222.
doi: 10.1080/00908320802013685
Dutton, P. H., and Squires, D. (2011). “A holistic strategy for Pacific sea turtle
conservation,” in Conservation of Pacific Sea Turtles, eds P. H. Dutton, D.
Squires, and M. Ahmed (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press), 37–59. doi:
10.1515/9780824860196-005
Eigaard, O. R., Marchal, P., Gislason, H., and Rijnsdorp, A. D. (2014).
Technological development and fisheries management. Rev. Fish. Sci. Aqu. 22,
156–174. doi: 10.1080/23308249.2014.899557
Farrow, K., Grolleau, G., and Ibanez, L. (2017). Social norms and proenvironmental behavior: a review of the evidence. Ecol. Econ. 140, 1–13. doi:
10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.04.017
Favaro, B., and Côté, I. M. (2015). Do by-catch reduction devices in longline
fisheries reduce capture of sharks and rays? A global meta-analysis. Fish Fish.
16, 300–309. doi: 10.1111/faf.12055
Fina, M. (2017). Alaskan Groundfish Trawl and Halibut Bycatch. Presentation to
Workshop on incentive-based bycatch reduction case studies, Sète: NOAAIRD-Ifremer.
Foale, S., Cohen, P., Januchowski-Hartley, S., Wenger, A., and Macintyre, M.
(2011). Tenure and taboos: origins and implications for fisheries in the Pacific.
Fish Fish. 12, 357–369. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2979.2010.00395.x
Foale, S., and Manele, B. (2004). Social and political barriers to the use of marine
protected areas for conservation and fishery management in Melanesia. Asia
Pac. Viewp. 45, 373–386. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8373.2004.00247.x
Fullerton, D., and Wolverton, A. (1999). “The case for a two-part instrument:
presumptive tax and environmental subsidy,” in Environmental and Public
Economics: Essays in Honor of Wallace E. Oates, eds A. Panagariya, P. Portney,
and R. Schwab (Cheltenham: Edward-Elgar), 32–57.
Gilman, E., Brothers, N., and Kobayashi, D. R. (2005). Principles and approaches
to abate seabird by-catch in longline fisheries. Fish Fish. 6, 35–49. doi: 10.1111/
j.1467-2679.2005.00175.x
Gilman, E., Chaloupka, M., Dagorn, L., Hall, M., Hobday, A., Musyl, M., et al.
(2019). Robbing Peter to pay Paul: replacing unintended cross-taxa conflicts
with intentional tradeoffs by moving from piecemeal to integrated fisheries
bycatch management. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 29, 93–123. doi: 10.1007/s11160-01909547-1
Gilman, E., Chaloupka, M., Swimmer, Y., and Piovano, S. (2016). A cross-taxa
assessment of pelagic longline by-catch mitigation measures: conflicts and
mutual benefits to elasmobranchs. Fish Fish. 17, 748–784. doi: 10.1111/faf.
12143

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Gilman, E., Chaloupka, M., Wiedoft, B., and Wilson, J. (2014). Mitigating seabird
bycatch during hauling by pelagic longline vessels. PLoS One 9:e84499. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0084499
Gilman, E., Chloupka, M., Bach, P., Fennell, H., Hall, M., Musyl, M., et al. (2020).
Effect of pelagic longline bait type on species selectivity: a global synthesis of
evidence. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 30, 535–551. doi: 10.1007/s11160-020-09612-0
Gilman, E., Gearhart, J., Price, B., Eckert, S., Miliken, H., Wang, J., et al. (2010).
Mitigating sea turtle by-catch in coastal passive net fisheries. Fish Fish. 11,
57–88. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2979.2009.00342.x
Gilman, E., and Lundin, C. G. (2010). “Minimizing bycatch of sensitive species
groups in marine capture fisheries: Lessons from tuna fisheries,” in Handbook
of Marine Fisheries Conservation and Management, eds R. Q. Grafton, R.
Hilborn, D. Squires, N. Tait, and M. Williams (Oxford: Oxford University
Press), 150–164.
Gilman, E., Zollett, E., Beverly, S., Nakano, H., Davis, K., Shiode, D., et al. (2006).
Reducing sea turtle by-catch in pelagic longline fisheries. Fish Fish. 7, 2–23.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2979.2006.00196.x
Gjertsen, H. (2011). “Can we improve our conservation bang for the buck?
Cost-effectiveness of alternative leatherback turtle conservation strategies,” in
Conservation of Pacific Sea Turtles, eds P. H. Dutton, D. Squires, and M. Ahmed
(Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press), 60–84. doi: 10.1515/9780824860
196-006
Gjertsen, H., Hall, M., and Squires, D. (2010). “Incentives to address bycatch issues,”
in Conservation and Management of Transnational Tuna Fisheries, eds R. Allen,
J. Joseph, and D. Squires (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell Publishing), 225–250.
doi: 10.1002/9780813820262.ch14
Gjertsen, H., Squires, D., Dutton, P. H., and Eguchi, T. (2014). Cost-effectiveness
of alternative conservation strategies with application to the Pacific leatherback
turtle. Conserv. Biol. 28, 140–149. doi: 10.1111/cobi.12239
Gjertsen, H., and Stevenson, T. C. (2011). “Direct incentive approaches for
leatherback turtle conservation,” in Conservation of Pacific Sea Turtles, eds P. H.
Dutton, D. Squires, and M. Ahmed (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press),
164–182. doi: 10.1515/9780824860196-013
Gneezy, U., Meier, S., and Rey-Biel, P. (2011). When and why incentives (don’t)
work to modify behavior. J. Econ. Perspect. 25, 191–210. doi: 10.1257/jep.25.
4.191
Goulder, L. H., and Parry, I. W. H. (2008). Instrument choice in environmental
policy. Rev. Env. Econ. Policy 2, 152–174. doi: 10.1093/reep/ren005
Griffiths, V. F., Bull, J. W., Baker, J., and Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2019a). No net loss
for people and biodiversity. Conserv. Biol. 33, 76–87. doi: 10.1111/cobi.13184
Griffiths, V. F., Sheremet, O., Hanley, N., Baker, J., Bull, J. W., and Milner-Gulland,
E. J. (2019b). Local people’s preferences for biodiversity offsets to achieve ‘no
net loss’ for economic developments. Biol. Conserv. 236, 162–170. doi: 10.1016/
j.biocon.2019.05.049
Guillotreau, P., Salladarré, F., Dewals, P., and Dagorn, L. (2011). Fishing tuna
around Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) vs free swimming schools: skipper
decisions and other determining factors. Fish. Res. 109, 234–242. doi: 10.1016/
j.fishres.2011.02.007
Hair, C., Foale, S., Daniels, N., Minimulu, P., Aini, J., and Southgate, P. C.
(2020). Social and economic challenges to community-based sea cucumber
mariculture development in New Ireland province, Papua New Guinea. Mar.
Pol. 117:103940. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2020.103940
Hall, M., Gillman, E., Minami, H., Mituhasi, T., and Carruthers, E. (2017).
Mitigating bycatch in tuna fisheries. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 27, 881–908. doi:
10.1007/s11160-017-9478-x
Hall, M., and Roman, M. (2013). Bycatch and Non-Tuna Catch in the Tropical
Tuna Purse Seine Fisheries of the World. FAO fisheries and aquaculture technical
paper 568., Rome: FAO, 262.
Hall, M. A. (1996). On bycatches. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 6, 319–352. doi: 10.1007/
bf00122585
Hall, M. A., Alverson, D. L., and Metuzals, K. I. (2000). By-catch: problems and
solutions. Mar. Poll. Bull. 41, 204–219. doi: 10.1016/s0025-326x(00)00111-9
Hamilton, R. J., Hughes, A., Brown, C. J., Leve, T., and Kama, W. (2019).
Community-based management fails to halt declines of bumphead parrotfish
and humphead wrasse in Roviana Lagoon, Solomon Islands. Coral Reefs 38,
455–465. doi: 10.1007/s00338-019-01801-z
Hannesson, R. (2010). “Individual quotas for bycatches: lessons for the tunadolphin issue,” in Conservation and Management of Transnational Tuna

16

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

Fisheries, eds R. Allen, J. Joseph, and D. Squies (Hoboken, NJ: Blackwell-Wiley),
215–224.
Harry, A. V., Tobin, A. J., Simpfendorfer, C. A., Welch, D. J., Mapleston, A., et al.
(2011). Evaluating catch and mitigating risk in a multispecies, tropical, inshore
shark fishery within the great barrier reef world heritage area. Mar. Freshwater
Res. 62, 710–721. doi: 10.1071/mf10155
Helfand, G. (2013). “Standards,” in Encyclopedia of Energy, Natural Resources, and
Environmental Economics, Vol. 3, ed. J. F. Shogren (Amsterdam: Elsevier),
217–221.
Helvey, M., Pomeroy, C., Pradhan, N. C., Squires, D., and Stohs, S. (2017). Can
the United States have its fish and eat it too? Mar. Policy 75, 62–67. doi:
10.1016/j.marpol.2016.10.013
Hobday, A. J., Maxwell, S. M., Forgie, J., and McDonald, J. (2013). Dynamic ocean
management: integrating scientific and technological capacity with law, policy,
and management. Stanford Envtl. Law J. 33, 125–165.
Holland, D. S., and Jannot, J. E. (2012). Bycatch risk pools for US west coast
groundfish fishery. Ecol. Econ. 78, 132–147. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.
04.010
Holland, D. S., and Martin, C. (2019). Bycatch quotas, risk pools, and cooperation
in the Pacific whiting fishery. Front. Mar. Sci. 6:600. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2019.
00600
Holland, D. S., and Schnier, K. (2006). Individual habitat quotas for fisheries.
J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 51, 72–92. doi: 10.1016/j.jeem.2005.04.005
Howell, E. A., Kobayashi, D. R., Parker, D. M., Balazs, G. H., and Polovina, J. J.
(2008). Turtle Watch: a tool to aid in the bycatch reduction of loggerhead turtles
caretta caretta in the Hawaii-based pelagic longline fishery. Endang. Spec. Res.
5, 267–278. doi: 10.3354/esr00096
Innes, J., Pascoe, S., Wilcox, C., Jennings, S., and Paredes, S. (2015). Mitigating
undesirable impacts in the marine environment: a review of market-based
measures. Front. Mar. Sci. 2:76. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2015.00076
Jaffee, A., Newell, R., and Stavins, R. (2005). A tale of two market failures:
technology and environmental policy. Ecol. Econ. 54, 164–174. doi: 10.1016/
j.ecolecon.2004.12.027
Janisse, C., Squires, D., Seminoff, J., and Dutton, P. H. (2010). “Conservation
investments and mitigation: the california drift gillnet fishery and pacific Sea
turtles,” in Handbook of Marine Fisheries Conservation and Management, eds
R. Q. Grafton, R. Hilborn, D. Squires, N. Tait, and M. Williams (Oxford: Oxford
University Press), 231–240.
Jensen, F., Frost, H., and Abildtrup, J. (2017). Fisheries regulation: a survey of the
literature on uncertainty, compliance behavior and asymmetric information.
Mar. Policy 81, 167–178. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2017.03.028
Johannes, R. E. (1978). Traditional marine conservation in oceania and their
demise. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 9, 349–364. doi: 10.1146/annurev.es.09.110178.
002025
Jones, C. I., and Romer, P. M. (2010). The new Kaldor Facts: ideas, institutions,
population, and human capital. Am. Econ. J. Macroecon. 2, 224–245. doi:
10.1257/mac.2.1.224
Joyner, C., and Tyler, Z. (2000). Marine conservation versus international free
trade: reconciling dolphins with tuna and sea turtles with shrimp. Ocean Dev.
Int. Law 31, 127–150. doi: 10.1080/009083200276094
Kahn, P. H., and Friedman, B. (1995). Environmental views and values of children
in an inner-city black community. Child Dev. 66, 1403–1417. doi: 10.2307/
1131654
Kaplan, D. M., Chassot, E., Amandé, J. M., Dueri, S., Demarcq, H., Dagorn, L., et al.
(2014). Spatial management of Indian Ocean tropical tuna fisheries: potential
and perspectives. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 71, 1728–1749. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fst233
Katz, M., and Shapiro, C. (1986). Technology adoption in the presence of network
externalities. J. Polit. Econ. 94, 822–841. doi: 10.1086/261409
Keith, D. M., Sameoto, J. A., Keyser, F. M., and Ward-Paige, C. A. (2020).
Evaluating socio-economic and conservaton impacts of management: a case
study of time-area closures on Georges Bank. PLoS One 15:e0240322. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0240322
Kerstetter, D. W., and Graves, J. E. (2006). Effects of circle versus J-style hooks on
target and non-target species in a pelagic longline fishery. Fish. Res. 80, 239–250.
doi: 10.1016/j.fishres.2006.03.032
Kotchen, M. J. (1999). Voluntary provision of public goods for bads: a theory of
environmental offsets. Econ. J. 119, 883–899. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0297.2008.
02215.x

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Kotchen, M. J. (2013). Voluntary and information-based approaches to
environmental management: a public economics perspective. Rev. Environ.
Econ. Policy 7, 276–295. doi: 10.1093/reep/ret012
Kotchen, M. J., and Segerson, K. (2019). On the use of group performance and
rights for environmental protection and resource management. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 116, 5285–5292. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1802881115
Lent, R., and Squires, D. (2017). Reducing marine mammal bycatch in global
fisheries: an economics approach. Deep Sea Res. II 140, 268–277. doi: 10.1016/
j.dsr2.2017.03.005
Libecap, G. D. (2014). Addressing global environmental externalities: transaction
cost considerations. J. Econ. Lit. 52, 424–479. doi: 10.1257/jel.52.2.424
Little, A. S., Needle, C. L., Hilborn, R., Holland, D. S., and Marshall, C. T. (2015).
Real-time spatial management approaches to reduce bycatch and discards:
experiences from Europe and the United States. Fish Fish. 16, 576–602. doi:
10.1111/faf.12080
Little, I. M. D., and Mirrlees, J. A. (1974). Project Appraisal and Planning for
Developing Countries. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Lodge, M., Segerson, K., and Squires, D. (2019). “Environmental policy for deep
seabed mining,” in Environmental Issues of Deep Sea Mining, ed. R. Sharma
(Cham: Springer), doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-12696-4_13
Marcovaldi, M. A. (2011). “Project TAMAR-ICMBio,” in Conservation of Pacific
Sea Turtles, eds P. H. Dutton, D. Squires, and M. Ahmed (Honolulu: University
of Hawaii Press), 148–164. doi: 10.1515/9780824860196-012
Maxwell, S. M., Hazen, E. L., Lewison, R. L., Dunn, D. C., Bailey, H., Bograd, S. J.,
et al. (2015). Dynamic ocean management: defining and conceptualizing realtime management of the ocean. Mar. Policy 58, 42–50. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.
2015.03.014
Melli, V., Hermann, B., Karlsen, J. D., Feekings, J. P., and Krag, L. A. (2020).
Predicting optimal combinations of by-catch reduction devices in trawl
gears: a meta-analytical approach. Fish Fish. 21, 252–268. doi: 10.1111/faf.
12428
Melvin, E. F., Guy, T. J., and Read, L. B. (2014). Best practice bycatch mitigation
for pelagic longline fisheries targeting tuna and related fisheries. Fish. Res. 149,
5–18. doi: 10.1016/j.fishres.2013.07.012
Miller, S. J., and Deacon, R. T. (2017). Protecting marine ecosystems: regulation
versus market incentives. Mar. Resour. Econ. 32, 83–107. doi: 10.1086/689214
Milner-Gulland, E. J., Garcia, S., Arlidge, W., Bull, J., Charles, T., Dagorn, L., et al.
(2018). Translating the terrestrial mitigation hierarchy to marine megafauna
bycatch. Fish. Fish. 19, 547–561. doi: 10.1111/faf.12273
Misund, O. A., and Beltestad, A. K. (2000). Survival of mackerel and saithe that
escape through sorting grids in purse seines. Fish. Res. 48, 31–41. doi: 10.1016/
s0165-7836(00)00118-1
Mize, J. (2014). Report to the North Pacific Fishery Management Council on the
2013 Bering Sea Pollock Mothership Salmon Savings Incentive Plan. ITEM C7 –
Mothership Salmon Savings Incentive Plan, April 2014. Alaska, AK: North Pacific
Fishery Management Council.
Mobius, M., and Rosenblat, T. (2014). Social learning in economics. Ann. Rev.
Resour. Econ. 6, 827–847.
Moreno, G., Restrepo, V., Dagorn, L., Hall, M., Murua, J., et al. (2016). Workshop on
the Use of Biodegradable Fish Aggregating Devices (FAD). ISSF Technical Report
2016-18A, Washington: International Seafood Sustainability Foundation.
Mukherjee, Z. (2015). An economic approach to understanding the international
transfer of bycatch from unilateral bycatch reduction policies. Mar. Policy 51,
190–195. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2014.07.024
Murray, K. T., Read, A. J., and Solow, A. R. (2000). The use of time/area closures to
reduce bycatch of harbour porpoises: lessons from the gulf of maine sink gillnet
fishery. J. Cetacean Res. Manage. 2, 135–141.
Niesten, E., and Gjertsen, H. (2010). Economic Incentives for Marine Conservation.
Arlington, TX: Conservation International.
Nyborg, K., Anderies, J. M., Dannenberg, A., Lindahl, T., Schill, C., Schlüter, M.,
et al. (2016). Social norms as solutions. Science 354, 42–43.
OECD (2006). Optimum Yield (in Fish Harvest). Available online at: https://stats.
oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=1915 (accessed March 8, 2021).
Oremus, M., Leqata, J., and Baker, C. S. (2015). Resumption of traditional drive
hunting in the Solomon Islands in 2013. R. Soc. Open Sci. 2:140524. doi:
10.1098/rsos.140524
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for
Collective Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

17

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

Pakiding, F., Zohar, K., Allo, A. Y. T., Keroman, S., Lontoh, D., Dutton, P. H.,
et al. (2020). Community engagement: an integral component of a multifaceted
conservation approach for the transboundary western Pacific leatherback.
Front. Mar. Sci. 7:549570. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2020.549570
Papworth, S. K., Rist, J., Coad, L., and Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2009). Evidence for
shifting baseline syndrome in conservation. Conserv. Lett. 2, 93–100.
Pascoe, S., Innes, J., Holland, D., Finas, M., Thebaud, O., Townsend, R., et al.
(2010). Use of incentive-based management systems to limit bycatch and
discarding. Int. Rev. Enviro. Resour. Econ. 4, 123–161. doi: 10.1561/101.
00000032
Pascoe, S., Wilcox, C., and Donlan, C. J. (2011). Biodiversity offsets: a costeffective interim solution to seabird bycatch in fisheries? PLoS One 6:e25762.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025762
Pauly, D. (1995). Anecdotes and the shifting baseline syndrome of fisheries. Trends
Ecol. Evol. 10:430. doi: 10.1016/s0169-5347(00)89171-5
Price, B., and Van Salisbury, C. (2007). Low-Profile Gillnet Testing in the Deep Water
Region of Pamlico Sound, N.C. Morehead City, NC: North Caroline Department
of Marine Fisheries.
Prno, J., and Slocombe, S. L. (2012). Exploring the origins of ‘social license to
operate’ in the mining sector: perspectives from governance and sustainability
theories. Res. Policy 37, 346–357. doi: 10.1016/j.resourpol.2012.04.002
Quigley, J., and Harper, D. (2006). Compliance with Canada’s Fisheries Act: a
field audit of habitat compensation projects. Environ. Manag. 37, 336–350.
doi: 10.1007/s00267-004-0262-z
Rausser, G. S., Hamilton, M., Kovach, R., and Stifter. (2009). Unintended
consequences: the spillover effects of common property regulations. Mar. Policy
33, 24–39. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2008.03.020
Reinhardt, J. F., Weaver, J., Latham, P. J., Dell’Apa, A., Serafy, J. E., Browder, J. A.,
et al. (2017). Catch rate and at-vessel mortality of circle hooks versus J-hooks
in pelagic longline fisheries: a global meta-analysis. Fish Fish. 19, 413–430.
doi: 10.1111/faf.12260
Restrepo, V. V., Dagorn, L., Itano, D., Justel-Rubio, A., Forget, F., and Moreno,
G. (2017). A Summary of Bycatch Issues and ISSF Mitigation Initiatives toDate in Purse Seine Fisheries, with Emphasis on FADs. Available online at:
https://www.seafish.org/media/ISSF-2017-06-ASummary-of-Bycatch-Issuesand-ISSF-Mitigation-Activities-to-Date-in-Purse-Seine-Fisheries-withEmphasis-on-FADs.pdf (accessed March 8, 2021).
Rode, J., Gómez-Baggethun, E., and Krause, T. (2015). Motivation crowding by
economic incentives in conservation policy: a review of the empirical evidence.
Ecol. Econ. 117, 270–282. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.11.019
Rodríguez-Sickert, C., Guzmaìn, R. A., and Cardenas, J. C. (2008). Institutions
influence preferences: evidence from a common pool resource experiment.
J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 67, 215–227. doi: 10.1016/j.jebo.2007.06.004
Romans, J. T. (1966). Moral suasion as an instrument of economic policy. Am.
Econ. Rev. 56, 1220–1226.
Romer, P. M. (1986). Increasing returns and long-run growth. J. Polit. Econ. 94,
1002–1037. doi: 10.1086/261420
Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. J. Polit. Econ. 98, 71–102.
Sarmiento, C. (2006). Transfer function estimation of trade leakages generated
by court rulings in the Hawai’i longline fisher. Appl. Econ. 38, 183–190. doi:
10.1080/00036840500368078
Scottish Government (2011). Scottish Government Conservation Credits Scheme:
Scheme Rules. Versions 2.1 (11 May 2011).
Segerson, K. (2010). “Can voluntary programs reduce sea turtle bycatch? Insights
from the literature in environmental economics,” in Handbook of Marine
Fisheries Conservation and Management, eds R. Q. Grafton, R. Hilborn,
D. Squires, M. Tait, and M. Williams (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
618–629.
Segerson, K. (2011). “Policies to reduce stochastic sea turtle bycatch,” in
Conservation of Pacific Sea Turtles, eds P. H. Dutton, D. Squires, and M. Ahmed
(Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press), 370–395. doi: 10.1515/9780824860
196-021
Segerson, K. (2013). Voluntary approaches to environmental protection and
management. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 5, 161–180.
Shiode, D., Hu, F., Shiga, M., Yokota, K., and Tokai, T. (2005). Midwater
float system for standardizing hook depths on tuna longlines to reduce sea
turtle by-catch. Fish. Sci. 71, 1182–1184. doi: 10.1111/j.1444-2906.2005.01
080.x

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Singh, R., and Weninger, Q. (2014). Cap-and-trade bycatch management with
costly avoidance and stock uncertainty. Mar. Res. Econ. 30, 97–119. doi: 10.
1086/679461
Sorenson, O. (2018). Innovation policy in a networked world. Innovat. Pol. Econ.
18, 53–77. doi: 10.1086/694407
Squires, D., and Garcia, S. M. (2018). Economic efficiency and the biodiversity
mitigation hierarchy with a focus on marine and fishery issues. Conserv. Biol.
32, 989–997. doi: 10.1111/cobi.13155
Squires, D., Restrepo, V., and Garcia, S. M. (2018). Fisheries bycatch reduction
within the least-cost biodiversity mitigation hierarchy: conservatory offsets with
an application to sea turtles. Mar. Policy 93, 55–61. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2018.
03.018
Squires, D., and Vestergaard, N. (2013a). Technical change and the commons. Rev.
Econ. Stat. 95, 1769–1787.
Squires, D., and Vestergaard, N. (2013b). Technical change in fisheries. Mar. Policy
42, 286–292. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2013.03.019
Squires, D., and Vestergaard, N. (2018). Rethinking the commons problem:
technological change, knowledge spillovers, and social learning. J. Environ.
Econ. Manage. 91, 1–25. doi: 10.1016/j.jeem.2018.06.011
Thornton, D., Kagan, R. A., and Gunningham, N. (2009). When social norms and
pressures are not enough: environmental performance in the trucking industry.
Law Soc. Rev. 43, 405–436. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-5893.2009.00377.x
Thorpe, T., and Frierson, D. (2009). Bycatch mitigation assessment for sharks
caught in coastal anchored gillnets. Fish. Res. 98, 102–112. doi: 10.1016/j.fishres.
2009.04.003
Torell, E., Crawford, B., Kotowicz, D., Herrera, M. D., and Tobey, J. (2010).
Moderating our expectations on livelihoods in ICM: experiences from
Thailand, Nicaragua, and Tanzania. Coast. Manag. 38, 216–237. doi: 10.1080/
08920753.2010.483166
Travers, H., Clements, T., Keane, A., and Milner-Gulland, E. (2011). Incentives
for cooperation: the effects of institutional controls on common pool resource
extraction in Cambodia. Ecol. Econ. 71, 151–161. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.
08.020
Van Dover, C. L., Aronson, J., Pendleton, L., Smith, S., Arnaud-Haond, S., MorenoMateos, D., et al. (2014). Ecological restoration in the deep sea: desiderata. Mar.
Policy 44, 98–106. doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2013.07.006
Velez, M., Murphy, J., and Stranlund, J. (2010). Centralized and decentralized
management of local common pool resources in the developing world:
experimental evidence from fishing communities in Colombia. Econ. Inquiry
48, 254–265. doi: 10.1111/j.1465-7295.2008.00125.x
Vestergaard, N. (2010). “Principal-agent problems in fisheries,” in Handbook of
Fisheries Conservation and Management, eds R. Q. Grafton, R. Hilborn, D.
Squires, M. Tait, and M. Williams (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 563–571.
Vicary, S. (2000). Donations to a public good in a large economy. Eur. Econ. Rev.
44, 609–618. doi: 10.1016/s0014-2921(98)00085-3
Wakefield, C. B., Santana-Garcon, J., Dorman, S. R., Blight, S., Denham, A.,
Wakeford, J., et al. (2016). Performance of bycatch reduction devices varies
for chondrichthyan, reptile, and cetacean mitigation in demersal fish trawls:
assimilating subsurface interactions and unaccounted mortality. ICES J. Mar.
Sci. 74, 343–358. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsw143
Walmo, K., Bisack, K., Lew, D. K., and Squires, D. (2016). The economics of
protected marine species: concepts in research and management. Front. Mar.
Sci. 3:183. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2016.00183
Wang, J., Barkan, J., Fisler, S., Godinez-Reyes, C., and Swimmer, Y. (2013).
Developing ultraviolet illumination of gillnets as a method to reduce sea turtle
bycatch. Biol. Lett. 9:20130383. doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2013.0383
Ward, P., Lawrence, E., Darbyshire, R., and Hindmarsh, S. (2008). Largescale
experiment shows that nylon leaders reduce shark bycatch and benefit pelagic
longline fishers. Fish. Res. 90, 100–108. doi: 10.1016/j.fishres.2007.09.034
Watson, J. T., Stram, D. L., and Harmon, J. (2020). Mitigating seafood waste
through a bycatch reduction program. Front. Mar. Sci. 7:576431. doi: 10.3389/
fmars.2020.576431
Watson, J. W., Epperly, S. P., Shah, A. K., and Foster, D. G. (2005). Fishing methods
to reduce sea turtle mortality associated with pelagic longlines. Can. J. Fish.
Aquatic Sci. 62, 965–981. doi: 10.1139/f05-004
Werner, T., Kraus, S., Read, A., and Zollett, E. (2006). Fishing techniques to reduce
the bycatch of threatened marine animals. Mar. Technol. Soc. J. 40, 50–68.
doi: 10.4031/002533206787353204

18

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

Squires et al.

Interdisciplinary Approaches to Mitigating Bycatch

Western, D., and Wright, R. M. (eds) (1994). Natural Connections. Washington,
DC: Island Press.
Wilcox, C., and Donlan, C. J. (2007). Compensatory mitigation as a solution
to fisheries by- catch-biodiversity conservation conflicts. Front. Ecol. Environ.
5:331.
Wolf, S., Hartl, B., Carroll, C., Neel, M. C., and Greenwald, D. N. (2015).
Beyond PVA: why recovery under the endangered species act is more
than population viability. Bioscience 65, 200–207. doi: 10.1093/biosci/biu
218
Worldfish Center (2004). “Bellagio blueprint for action on pacific sea turtles,” in
Conservation of Pacific Sea Turtles, eds P. Dutton, D. Squires, and M. Ahmed
(Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press), 15–32. doi: 10.1515/9780824860196004
Wright, J. H., Hill, N. A. O., Roe, D., Rowcliffe, J. M., Kümpel, N. F., Day, M., et al.
(2015). Reframing the concept of alternative livelihoods. Cons. Bio. 30, 7–13.
doi: 10.1111/cobi.12607

Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org

Young, H. P. (1994). Equity: How Groups Divide Goods and Burdens Among Their
Members. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Young, H. P. (2015). The evolution of social norms. Ann. Rev. Econ. 7, 359–387.
Young, H. P. (2008). “Social norms,” in New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd
Edn, eds S. N. Durlauf and L. E. Blume (London: Macmillan).
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2021 Squires, Balance, Dagorn, Dutton and Lent. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

19

March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 613285

