OVERFISHING IN THE GULF OF THAILAND: POLICY CHALLENGES AND
BIOECONOMIC ANALYSIS1

Mahfuzuddin Ahmed2 (For Correspondence)
Pongpat Boonchuwongse3
Waraporn Dechboon4
Dale Squires5
Abstract. This paper estimates maximum sustainable yield and maximum economic yield
from Schaefer and Fox surplus production bioeconomic models to find evidence of biological
and economic overfishing, and their consequences in Gulf of Thailand demersal fisheries.
The paper examines alternative policy instruments to reduce overfishing. The discussion
emphasizes on strengthening fishery management for implementing limited access, and a
combination of co-management, and decentralization of fisheries management. The use of
license fees that serves as a double dividend tax to reduce fishing effort and fund monitoring
and enforcement has been proposed as one of the possible economic instruments.
Key words: Bioeconomic model, Gulf of Thailand, demersal fisheries, limited access, comanagement
Short title: Overfishing and Policy in the Gulf of Thailand Fisheries

1

This paper is part of the Socioeconomic Component (Socioeconomic Profile, Fleet Operational
Dynamics and Bioeconomic Modeling) of the Asian Development Bank project RETA 5766. The
project is funded by the WorldFish Center, other participating organizations, and the Asian
Development Bank under RETA 5766..

2

Principal Social Scientist and Program Leader, Policy Research and Impact Assessment, WorldFish
Center, Jalan Batu Maung, 11960 Bayan Lepas, Penang, Malaysia; fax: (604) 626-5530; email:
m.ahmed@cgiar.org

3

Fisheries Economist, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperative, Kasetsart
University Campus, Phaholyotin Road, Bangkok 10900, Thailand; email: pongpatb@fisheries.go.th

4

Fisheries Biologist, Southern Marine Fisheries Development Center (SMDEC), 79/1 Vichienchom,
Road Muang District, Songkhla 90000, Thailand; email: SMDEC@hatyai.inet.co.th

5

Resource Economist, NOAA Fisheries, Southwest Fisheries Science Center, 8604 La Jolla Shores
Drive, La Jolla, California 92037, USA; email: dsquires@ucsd.edu

1. Introduction
The rapid expansion of fisheries in the Gulf of Thailand has raised considerable
economic and environmental concerns for its management. An increasing proportion of
undersized fish and decreasing volume of commercially important species in the composition
of fish catch in recent years suggest symptoms of biological overfishing and biologically
overfished resource stocks, threatening the fisheries in the Gulf. Similarly, falling profits of
individual vessels and low economic rents have implications for economic viability of the
fishing industry, and points to the economic overfishing and economically overfished fish
stocks.
The economics and management of fisheries in the Gulf of Thailand have received
only a limited amount of attention. Panayotou and Jetanavanich (1987) evaluated the levels
of catch and fishing effort that give rise to the static maximum economic yield (MEY) in
fisheries for demersal (bottom-dwelling) species. They found that, under conditions of the
1980s, the optimum (MEY) catch and effort (given a mesh size of 2.5 cm) for demersal
fisheries were 958,000 tons and 15.7 million standard fishing hours. The results implied that
demersal catch in recent years had surpassed the level of static MEY. Panayotou and
Jetanavanich recommended a license limitation program to bring the fishery into balance
with MEY. Piumsombun (1992) drew similar conclusions on the status of the pelagic fishery
on the Indo-Pacific mackerel, locally known as ‘pla-tu’ in the Gulf of Thailand, suggesting
that this pelagic fishery is already economically overfished. Introduction of a license limitation
scheme was proposed to curb the excessive effort in the fishery.
The purpose of this paper is to provide a current bioeconomic analysis of the Gulf of
Thailand demersal fisheries, comprehensive across all relevant gear and fish species, to
estimate both economic and biological maximum levels of yield and effort, and then to
discuss corresponding measures to manage the fishery. The Pareto-inefficient levels of yield
and effort found under open access are compared to the estimated economic and biological
optimums - MEY and MSY (maximum sustainable yields), respectively. This comparative
static analysis would provide evidence of economic and biological overfishing and overfished

1

resource stocks as a whole, and Pareto inefficiency for the fishery.1 Using the bioeconomic
assessment as a basis, we discuss (potential) Pareto-improving economic policies to shift
the fisheries toward MEY and MSY. The paper updates the analysis of Panayotou and
Jetanavanich in light of the current market, fishery and environmental conditions and
provides policy recommendations that are consistent with Panayotou and Jetanavanich and
Piumsombun, including license limitation. There is a national urgency as well as a global
significance in targeting to move toward higher level of long-term economic and biological
sustainability as it will ensure the role of fisheries as an engine for economic growth in the
future, and at the same time respond to the WSSD (World Summit for Sustainable
Development) call for restoring fish stocks to sustainable levels globally (United Nations,
2002).
The bioeconomic analysis presented in this paper is aggregate across a number of
demersal gear types and species due to our comprehensive focus upon the fishery and all
sources of mortality on the demersal fish stocks in the Gulf of Thailand as a whole.
Disaggregated population dynamics models and bioeconomic models are notoriously difficult
to apply in tropical fisheries due to the complex multispecies nature of these fisheries and
demanding data requirements. An aggregate analysis has limitations in that gear-specific
policy conclusions are difficult to draw out of the empirical results, but single gear and
species analyses do not comprehensively assess the overall biological and economic status
of the fish stocks.2
The balance of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a background
to the fisheries and issues. Section 3 summarizes the bioeconomic models -- the Schaefer
and Fox models -- used to obtain estimates of maximum economic yield and maximum
sustainable yield. Section 4 discusses the data. Section 5 reports the empirical results.
Section 6 discusses the proposed policy to reduce overfishing and increase economic rents,
and Section 7 provides concluding remarks and recommendations.

2

2. Fisheries in the Gulf of Thailand 3
For a number of decades fisheries development in the Gulf of Thailand continued
along increasing fishing effort (Tables 1 and 2) to maintain or increase the production
volume (Figure 1). Increasingly, the total catch has a higher proportion of “trash” fish
(consisting of by-catch and undersized juveniles of various demersal and some pelagic
species), much of which goes to fish meal or duck feed or is thrown overboard), aggregated
across all species and gear types. Catch from Department of Fisheries research trawl
surveys is comprised of 30-40% “trash” fish, of which about one-third is juvenile and
undersized fish. The study from commercial fisheries also shows that “trash” fish contains at
least 30% juvenile fish. Pair trawl catch has the highest composition of juvenile fish, namely
Indo-Pacific mackerel, threadfin bream, lizard, big eye, scad, and sardine that represented
70% of total “trash” fish. Otter board trawl obtains juvenile fish, about 40% of total “trash” fish
(Sripanpaiboon, 1995, Eiamsa-Ard and Amornchairojkul 1997).
Table 2 displays standard total fishing effort, standardized across all gear types to be
comparable to 14-18 m otter trawl vessels (this procedure is discussed in Section 3).
Standard effort rises until reaching a peak in 1987, after which it falls. The most important
fishing gears for the capture of demersal “target” and “trash” fish (of all species caught in
demersal fisheries, but predominately demersal species) are otter board trawl, pair trawl and
push net (Table 2). The numbers of otter board and pair trawl vessels have increased over
time, but the number of push net vessels has fallen (Table 1). Trawl fishing provides the
greatest source of fishing mortality of all the major gear types, and the number of trawl
vessels is increasing over time.
A major source of the decline in demersal fisheries is overfishing by trawl gear at a
depth of more than 50 m since 1973. Nominal catch per unit of effort or CPUE (kg/hour) by
trawlers steadily declined, indicating declining resource stock abundance (Meemeskul, 1982;
Vadhanakul et al., 1985; Chotiyaputta, 1992; Intong et al, 1993; Jirapanpipat, 1992), while
the number of trawlers of all sizes and types continued to increase (Table 1). Trawlers
began to use the small cod-end mesh size, so that more “trash fish” could be caught to at

3

least partly compensate for the declining production and value of targeted species and sizes
of demersal fish. In addition, many trawlers, which formerly fished in foreign fishing grounds,
returned to the Gulf of Thailand to fish after the declaration of Extended Economic Zones
(EEZs) in the recent decades by the neighboring countries.
Gear types other than trawl and push net also contribute to fishing mortality of
demersal species and “trash” fish in the Gulf of Thailand (Table 2). These other gear types
include various types of purse seine and gill net gear. Total fishing effort, both nominal and
standardized, of these other gear types is much smaller, and substantially less fishing
mortality, than trawl and push net gear. Standardized fishing effort of these other gear,
although very small in comparison to trawl and push net gear, has been rising over 19711997.
With the decline in the catch of “target” demersal species in an increasingly
impoverished fishery, “trash” fish provides an increasingly important source of total catch
and revenue through its use for fish meal and to a lesser extent, duck feed. The increasing
importance of “trash” fish and fishing for demersal species of lesser commercial importance
or fishing demersal species further down the food chain is reflected in Table 3, where
standardized (discussed below) catch per unit of effort (CPUE) continues to climb due to the
catch of these fish, even as the catches of the most desirable demersal species stagnate or
fall. Standard CPUE also continues to climb due to productivity growth, which is largely due
to technological innovations such as the increasing adoption and use of vessel electronics.
Most of the important pelagic fish (fish in the middle and upper parts of the water
column) in the Gulf of Thailand are fully exploited, namely, Indo-Pacific mackerel, anchovies,
round scad and sardines. Indian mackerel is not yet overfished (Chullasorn, 1997). Almost
all of the demersal (bottom dwelling) resource stocks namely, fish, shrimps, squid, cuttlefish
and others are overfished (FAO, 1995).
The significant expansion of the Thai fishing fleet during the past three decades
entails not only more fishing vessels, but also vessels which are larger in size. In 1997, there
were16,264 fishing vessels in Thailand, of which 77% were registered in the provinces

4

located in the Gulf. Otter board trawl and pair trawl are the most important type of fishing
vessels, comprising about 53% of the total fleet in 1997. The remainder of the fleet is
comprised of purse seiners, gillnetters and other small boats employing traditional gears.
The fishing fleet is classified into four vessel sizes: less than 14 m, 14-18 m, 18-25 m and
over 25 m. The smallest vessel size accounts for 28% of the total fleet.
Fishing vessels larger than 18 m in length employ advanced fishing and navigation
technologies, involving the use of sonar systems, echo sounders, radios, radar and
electricity generators. The continued adoption of vessel electronics contributed to continual
growth in total factor productivity (“fishing power”), and thus increased effective fishing effort.
3. Schaefer and Fox Surplus Production Models
Maximum sustainable and economic yields and the associated optimum levels of
fishing effort can be estimated from surplus production models. The two most widely used
surplus production models, the Schaefer (1957) and Fox (1970), are employed in this paper
to estimate the biological and economic optimums. In light of the uncertainty that naturally
arises over the most appropriate form of the population dynamics (Quinn and Deriso 1999),
we estimate these two models with their differing functional forms. If the empirical results
from the two models signal consistent conclusions about the maximum economic and
biological sustainable yields and effort levels relative to current levels, then the implications
for the directions for catch and effort that lead to the social optimum can be considered
robust. In addition, since market, environmental, and community and population ecological
conditions do change over time, the estimated biological and economic optimums
correspondingly change, requiring future re-estimation of these models. Hence, the steadystate optimum levels per se from these two models will change over time, but the current
implied policy direction for catch and effort are the key pieces of information of interest to this
study.
For stock assessments in developed countries, surplus production models have
largely been superceded by various types of age-structured models (virtual population
analysis) or even more sophisticated synthetic models that synthesize all of the available

5

information, such as age structures and other demographic information, length-weight
relationships, stock-recruitment, and other available information (Fournier et al. 1998). These
synthetic models are applied to individual species rather than overall catch. Nonetheless,
age-structured and the more sophisticated synthetic species-specific models require more
abundant and detailed data by species, such as age determination or length-frequency,
which are simply unavailable in the fisheries of developing countries. In the tropics, for
example, age determination on a broad scale – especially with so many species, is simply
beyond the reasonable reach of analysts. Species sampling of landings on a consistent
scale is seldom available. In contrast, production models can be applied when reasonable
estimates are available of the total catch or catch per unit of effort (CPUE) and the related
fishing effort over a number of years, and are the type of model frequently applied in tropical
developing countries.4 As Hilborn and Walters (1992, p. 298) observe, “Furthermore, in
many fisheries, again tropical ones especially, the catch consists of many species, and the
catch data are difficult if not impossible to collect by species. Management regulations are
also difficult to make species specific. In these circumstances, treating the entire catch as a
biomass dynamics pool may be more appropriate than trying to look at single species
dynamics.
Two widely known and applied surplus production models, which are particularly applicable
to multi-species fisheries in the tropics, are those developed by Schaefer (1957) and Fox
(1970). The Schaefer and Fox models are based on the steady-state relationship between
resource stock size, fishing effort, and yield. Sustainable yield is a function of total effort and
stock size. Stock size (biomass) is a function of fishing effort and a limited number of
biological parameters, such as the intrinsic growth rate and environmental carrying capacity.
Growth is assumed to be density-dependent. Given the biological and environmental
parameters, sustainable yield is determined by the fishing effort applied. The models are
long-run, since they reflect complete resource stock adjustment to changes in the level of
fishing effort and fishing effort is a completely variable input. Table 4 provides the relevant
formulae for the Schaefer and Fox Models.

6

4. Data
The data for the demersal “target” and "trash" fish catches in the Gulf of Thailand by
Thai vessels using otter board trawl, pair trawl, and push nets were available over the period
1971-1995.5 These data exclude effort outside Thailand from the distant-water fleet. These
data were collected from the Fisheries Statistics Base of the Sample Survey (various
issues), officially reported by the Fisheries Economics Division of the Department of
Fisheries.
The demersal harvests were divided into 17 species of demersal “target” and "trash"
fish. The species of demersal fish included barracudas, croakers, threadfin breams, monocle
breams, lizardfishes, hairtails, snappers, sweetlips, bigeyes, sand whitings, barbell eel,
marine catfishes, rays, sharks, flatfishes, Indian halibut, and conger eels. For the period
1971-1984, the data reported the catch of the demersal species and “trash” fish from Thai
waters, but were broken down by gear types and vessel sizes. The proportion of demersal
catch from the Gulf of Thailand was estimated from the Marine Fisheries Statistics Base on
the Sample Survey during 1985-1995. During 1985-1995, the report showed the catch of
demersal and “trash” fish from the Gulf of Thailand and Andaman Sea, and was broken
down by gear types and vessel sizes. Table 1 reports the number of fishing vessels in the
Gulf of Thailand and Table 2 reports the catch and catch per unit of standardized effort,
where catch includes both demersal and “trash” fish.
To match demersal and “trash” fish catches with their corresponding levels of fishing
effort, data were collected in the Gulf of Thailand on vessel fishing hours. During 1971-1995,
(nominal) fishing effort data, reported in Table 2, were obtained from the Marine Fisheries
Statistics Base on the Sample Survey. Since demersal and “trash” fish resources are caught
by various types of gears and sizes of vessels, fishing effort was standardized into
equivalent or standardized units. Nominal fishing effort was standardized for the fishing
gears of otter board trawl, pair trawl, beam trawl, push net, purse seine, anchovy purse
seine, mackerel encircling gill net, and king mackerel gill net. Since engine horsepower (HP)

7

differs for different-sized vessels and types of gears, nominal fishing hours were
standardized by using 14-18 m otter board trawl as the standard. That is, an index of vessel
HP was computed using 14-18 m otter board trawl vessel engine HP as the basis. Table 5
reports the distribution of vessel sizes. Standard fishing effort, reported in Table 3, is
calculated by multiplying this standard HP index for each gear by the nominal fishing hours
for that gear.
Standardization proceeded somewhat differently for small-scale fisheries and
bamboo stake trap, since data on fishing hours were unavailable. Standard fishing effort was
calculated by dividing catch by catch per hour of a 14-18 m otter board trawl vessel. The
total standard fishing effort is the sum of the standard effort of all the gear types (Table 3).
Since effective fishing effort is affected over time through gear improvement, a
technological adjustment factor is calculated by dividing catch per hour of the standard
vessel by catch per hour of the research vessel (Ahmed 1991). The catching power of the
research vessel remained unchanged over time, allowing it to serve as a technological
standard. For 1990, 1992, and 1994, no experimental survey was conducted, and the mean
catch per unit of effort of the preceding and following years was used as an estimate of catch
per unit effort. The adjusted fishing effort is calculated by multiplying standard fishing effort
by the technological adjustment factor.
The unit cost of fishing effort is represented by costs per standard unit of fishing
effort. The total cost of fishing for demersal fish was calculated from the result of the Cost
and Earnings Survey of Major Fishing Gear in 1995. The major fishing gears were otter
board trawl, pair trawl, and push net. By using the annual cost of major fishing gear per
vessel, the major cost of each fleet is calculated by multiplying the annual major fishing gear
cost per vessel by the total number of vessels in the Gulf of Thailand in 1995 employed in
that fleet. The total fleet cost is the sum of the cost of all the gear types. This total cost
represents the total cost of total catches in the Gulf of Thailand. The proportion of demersal
and “trash” fish catch value was estimated from Fisheries Statistics of Thailand in 1995. The
percentage of demersal fish value is 34.33. The demersal fish cost is calculated by

8

multiplying percentage of demersal “target” and “trash” fish value by the total cost. The
demersal fish cost of major fishing gear is divided by the total standard fishing effort of those
gears. The cost per unit of fishing effort was estimated as 69.67 Baht per standard fishing
hour (for a mesh size of 2.5 cm).
Demersal and “trash” fish prices from the Gulf of Thailand were obtained from
Fisheries Statistics of Thailand in 1995. The 1995 price of fish per kilogram was estimated
as 6.68 Baht/kg.
5. Empirical Results
The CPUE forms of the Schaefer and Fox models were estimated by ordinary least
squares over 1971-1995 for the commercial fleet and are summarized in Table 6.6 Based on
these estimates, MSY for a mesh size of 3.4 cm for the standardized commercial fleet for
demersal and “trash” fish and the corresponding level of standardized effort were calculated
using equations from Table 4.
The empirical results, along with the corresponding actual 1995 values, are reported
in Table 7 for the Schaefer model and Table 8 for the Fox model and illustrated in Figure 2
for both models. The results are fundamentally consistent for the MSY and MEY levels of
catch, effort, and economic rent under both the Schaefer and Fox models, as clearly
demonstrated in Figure 2. The model results differ only for the open-access levels of fishing
effort, since the Fox model (with the Gompertz exponential growth function) allows for higher
levels of fishing effort before reaching zero total sustainable revenues. Hence, the two
different models signal consistent policy conclusions regarding the direction of changes in
the levels of fishing effort and total catch of demersal “target” and “trash” fish that give MSY
and MEY, thereby providing greater confidence in these policy conclusions even in light of
the uncertainty over the appropriate population dynamics.
Highlighting the results from the Schaefer model (Table 7), the MEY level of fishing
effort is about 50% of the actual 1995 level and 82% of the MSY level. However, the actual
catch of demersal fish is 93% of MEY and 90% of the MSY catch. Economic rents are, as
expected, highest at MEY, amounting to 4,433 million Baht or 5% higher than at MSY.

9

Highlighting the results of the Fox model (Table 8), the MEY level of fishing effort is about
46% of the actual 1995 level and 69% of the MSY level. However, the actual catch is 98% of
MSY catch. Economic rents are, as expected, highest at MEY, amounting to 3,943 million
Baht or 5% higher than at MSY.
The empirical results indicate that MEY management at the long-run, steady-state
level of effort will earn the industry and the country additional economic rent, gross of
management costs, ranging between 1,904 - 2,394 million Baht for the Schaefer and Fox
models, respectively. If the fishery is left unmanaged, fishing effort is expected to reach an
open-access Nash equilibrium, with rent dissipation, ranging between 56.62 - 69.56 x 106
standard hours, and with a sustainable catch ranging between 593,000 - 725,000 metric
tons, and society would lose between 3,943 - 4,433 million Baht in resource rents per year
according to the Schaefer and Fox models. These foregone resource rents represent a
sizeable opportunity cost to society. Pareto-improving conservation and management
policies that reduce fishing effort, and thereby increase sustainable yields, clearly increase
social welfare compared to the Pareto-inefficient current levels of fishing effort and yields.
With the notable exception of joint fishing ventures for offshore pelagic fish stocks,
management interventions that curtail fisheries production and employment will likely
increase conflicts among gear types and between gainers and losers, at least in the short
run, but probably also extending over the long run. As the empirical results have
demonstrated, the Gulf of Thailand fishery is far removed from either a biological or
economic optimum, thereby indicating biological and economic overfishing, along with
economically and biologically overfished resource stocks, and attainment of either optimum
requires Pareto-improving policies that work in the same direction by reducing fishing effort.
The paper now turns to a discussion of these policies.
6. Policy Implications
Our overview analysis of demersal fisheries in the Gulf of Thailand indicates that a
policy addressing the biological and economic overfishing and biological and economically
overfished resource stocks requires a substantial reduction in the current level of fishing

10

effort across all gear types. This aggregate analysis does not indicate which gears, species,
or geographical areas are most affected and require the greatest attention. Nonetheless,
from our macro-bioeconomic analysis, some fundamental broad brush strokes of policy
recommendations can be painted that are applicable across all gear types and species,
which we discuss in this section. A set of more disaggregated analyses would be required
before more detailed policies can be drawn. A policy aimed at reducing fishing effort,
coupled with the effects of on-going technical change, will invariably reduce the amount of
labor directly employed as fishers (Smith 1981). Nonetheless, this broad and crucial topic
largely lies beyond the scope of this particular paper. Moreover, the critical short- and
longer-term distributional issues – which participants may gain and which may bear the
burdens of adjustments -- also largely lie beyond the scope of this overview bioeconomic
analysis. Here, we narrow our focus to the main components of a Pareto-improving
management policy for demersal fisheries throughout the Gulf of Thailand,
Rights-Based Fisheries Management: Individual Transferable Quotas
A policy of transferable private property rights over a portion of the catch or resource
flow -- individual transferable quotas (ITQs), could theoretically reduce fishing effort to
eliminate biological or economic overfishing. ITQs are increasingly popular in the fisheries of
more developed countries in temperate latitudes with comparatively few fish species
(National Resource Council 1999). ITQs, however, are more difficult to implement in the
complex multispecies fisheries of the tropics, such as in the Gulf of Thailand, where
production is joint and the critical monitoring and enforcement problematic (Alam et al. 2002,
Squires et al. 1998, 2003). Multiple gear types further compound the underlying complexity
facing a multispecies ITQ program.7 For these same reasons of wide species diversity and
complexity, coupled with problems of resource stock assessment for individual species,
monitoring, enforcement, and resource stock assessment, conventional catch quotas are
likely to prove ineffective.
Limited Access: A Use Right

11

Limited access, a weaker form of a property right than ITQs, curbs access or use to
the fish stocks rather than establishing a private property right to a share of the demersal
catch as provided by ITQs. Limited access, through restricting the number of licenses, more
closely matches the current administrative and scientific capacity of the Thailand Department
of Fisheries, since only vessel licenses and numbers for each gear type need to be
monitored, enforced, and administered rather than the catches of different species or
species assemblages for individual fishing vessels as with ITQs.
A limited access program was in fact promulgated in 1982 and its effect
demonstrated over the 1982-1988 period by the gradual decline in the number of registered
trawlers and push nets gradually decreased. However, the total number of registered
trawlers and push nets has again increased.
The first step in a limited access policy entails a de facto -- rather than the heretofore
de jure, immediate and effective freeze in the number of trawlers and push nets, since
trawlers are by far the single largest source of fishing mortality and component of fishing
effort (Table 2).8 Push nets, which are used in inshore waters and in the process collect
juvenile shrimps and fish, contribute to economic and biological overfishing, and are viewed
as a destructive gear. This moratorium on trawlers and push nets prohibits the construction
of new vessels in more than just name, and stiffens compliance of the current compulsory
registration of the existing vessels with the Department of Fisheries.
The Fisheries Act of 1947 provides the legal basis for limited access and other
fishing regulations and for the authority to enforce these measures.9 The Department of
Fisheries has issued measures to control the construction of new trawl vessels, including
issuance of fishing licenses for the trawl fishery.10 The basic objective of a ministry regulation
issued in March 1990 is to gradually reduce the number of trawlers and push nets and
thereby bring down demersal fish catches to the optimum sustainable level. Licenses are
non-transferable to another person, except as family inheritance, and thereby contribute to
reducing fishing effort. Only licenses and navigation certificates of the holders are renewed,
thereby furnishing an additional policy handle to reduce effort. Licenses of vessels which

12

become involved in trespassing and encroachment into the jurisdictional waters of other
countries are forfeited and not reissued.
Implementation of, and compliance with, the limited entry program currently on the
books, rather than the broad intent of the laws and regulations, is the key issue for demersal
fisheries in the Gulf of Thailand. Enforcement of the regulations has been comparatively
ineffectual to date for a variety of reasons. These regulations apply to an extensive
geographical area spread over the entire coastline of Thailand, which is compounded by the
huge number of fishing boats operating different types of fish gear. The number of officials in
the field and patrol boats to inspect and enforce the regulations is too few. Moreover, the
laws of the country require that fishers need to be caught in the actual act of illegal fishing or
violating the regulations to be upheld in a court of law. Additional factors hampering effective
enforcement include insufficient cooperation and collaboration from fishers, high
enforcement costs, and lack of coordination and cooperation among relevant agencies.
Additional factors impede the licensing scheme. Because fishing vessels are
registered with the Harbor Department while the gear is licensed by Department of Fisheries,
a loophole enables registered fishing vessels to operate without a license for gear.
Moreover, with the current budget and manpower it is not easy for the Department of
Fisheries to enforce the licensing system over an extensive and technologically advanced
fleet, some of which can operate from foreign ports. There is also a need for more officials in
the field, better infrastructure and facilities for enforcement, and delegation of sufficient
authority for enforcement of the regulations to the provincial authority, such as an appointed
committee for this purpose, rather than only to the provincial fisheries officers.
Modifications to the design of the license limitation program are possible, which could
boost the policy effectiveness. A freeze on vessel numbers applied to other gear types
prevents spillover effects that would occur when fishing effort limited in one gear type spills
over to another, unregulated gear type as fishers expand and/or redirect fishing effort. A
licensing scheme can also be tailored to favor less environmentally destructive or more
profitable gear.

13

The broad species diversity of tropical fisheries can complicate license limitation
programs if single and multiple fishery licenses are issued (Ooi, 1990). Some vessels may
have too little flexibility to survive declines in individual stocks, while some species may be
excessively harvested (Tussing et al., 1974). These problems suggest that, given the joint
production of multiple species found with many gear types such as trawls, individual species
assemblages cannot be individually regulated as if the production process is non-joint.
Limited access has a number of limitations, several of which are already manifested
in Thai fisheries. Limited access, an imperfect right, has the problem that the excludability
characteristic of the property right is still not fully specified and developed, but the fish stocks
remain common resources and thus accessible to the remaining fishing vessels. As a
consequence, the underlying economic incentives compelling individual fishers to catch as
many fish as soon as possible are diminished but are not eliminated (Townsend 1990, Scott
1993, 2000). That is, economic incentives do not sufficiently guide players to invest in future
catches by delaying current catches and to improve their economic efficiency and the
dominant strategy of players remains non-cooperation. The common-pool technological
resource stock externality also remains, albeit on a reduced basis.
Because of the imperfect excludability of limited access, a major shortcoming of
limited access is the indirect relationship between fishing effort, which is multidimensional,
and fishing capacity and total factor productivity (“fishing power”) (Wilen 1979, 1988,
Hannesson 1983, Squires 1992).11 Coupled with the remaining – albeit attenuated –
incentive structure found under limited access, players have both economic incentives
(especially when prices rise or costs of production fall) and the potential technological ability
to expand the unregulated components of fishing effort, such as fishing time or vessel or
engine size.
To counter this expansion in effective fishing effort, limited access programs
frequently stipulate a maximum limit on one or more of the components of the composite
input fishing effort, such as vessel size (Campbell and Lindner 1990, Wilen 1979, 1988,
Hannesson 1983, National Research Council 1999). Increases in vessel size in the demersal

14

fisheries of the Gulf of Thailand could be allowed by simultaneously retiring smaller vessels
in the fishery and consolidating these licenses, and perhaps even retiring some portion of
the combined capital stock as measured by length or gross tonnage. Nonetheless, the
unregulated components of the composite input fishing effort may often be expanded as
discussed. In addition, attempts to control size can lead to adaptations that are inefficient or
are not seaworthy. Wilen (1979, 1988) observes that controlling fishing effort through
terminal gear restrictions is perhaps more important than restrictions on other inputs. Even
this terminal gear restriction does not curb advances in total factor productivity due to
process innovations, increases in size economies, or gains in technical efficiency. In sum,
the limited access program might constrain vessel length and terminal gear characteristics to
slow down the expansion of effective fishing effort, but nonetheless recognize that effective
fishing effort will most likely continue to expand, albeit at a reduced rate and in unexpected
dimensions.
Individual or Group Transferable Effort Quotas and Vessel Buybacks
Limited access programs, while a necessary cornerstone to fisheries management in
Thai demersal Gulf fisheries, by themselves are unlikely to sufficiently reduce fishing effort or
capacity to MEY or MSY levels (suitably modified by the Precautionary Principle). The
restrictiveness of a limited access program is correlated to its economic success (Townsend
1990). The most restrictive programs have either reduced fishing effort significantly or closed
entry before fishing effort reach rent-dissipating levels. Less restrictive programs have been
only marginally successful. Moratoria on entry that included a phased reduction in fishing
effort have similarly been only marginally successful.
Two potential effort-reducing management programs are vessel or license buybacks
and individual or group transferable effort quotas (ITEs). ITEs are another form of rightsbased management, in which shares (proportions) of total allowable fishing effort (TAE) (e.g.
total allowable days at sea for the fishery), are allocated to players – individuals or groups of
different types -- with vessels of larger size or in more profitable fisheries as property rights
and which can be freely transferred among players. (ITEs are likely to prove prohibitively

15

expensive and cumbersome in small-scale fisheries due to costs of transactions, monitoring,
and enforcement.) ITEs are not widely applied, although they are used in the New England
trawl fishery and the Hawaiian longline fishery for swordfish, and will soon be used in the
Western and Central Pacific tuna purse fishery. As a property right, ITEs can help align
conservation and economic incentives. ITEs can ideally be set at levels that target overall
short- and long-term sustainable target yields and allow for stock rebuilding, but setting the
TAE is difficult because of the nonlinear and dynamic relationship between effort and catch.
Moreover, ITE programs are vulnerable to a continued “race to fish” for desirable “target”
species, bycatch and “trash” fish concerns, and some species can be overfished and other
species can even be underfished, and different sustainable target levels for different species
can be reached prior to others. That is, ITEs are very inexact and indirect for multispecies
fisheries and joint production. ITE programs need to be built upon the foundation of a limited
access program to: prevent both entry into the fishery during allocation of ITEs and as
conditions improve; to preclude uneconomically small ITE holdings by an excessive number
of vessels, which inevitably would create pressures to expand the TAE beyond the
sustainable target level; and to establish an identified universe of participants during the
initial allocation. A fractional TAE system is possible, comparable to a fractional license
limitation program (Townsend and Pooley 1994), which would force consolidation of ITEs
and hence vessel exit from the fishery.
At first blush, ITEs are more promising than ITQs, because ITEs do not directly face
the complex multispecies issues of the tropics, and compliance and enforcement are
potentially possible through vessel monitoring systems (VMS), which are increasingly
tractable and affordable. However, fishing effort, usually measured in fishing time, is in fact a
heterogeneous vector of inputs, and fishing time is simply a proxy variable for a singlevalued, composite input (which theoretically exists only under homothetic input separability,
Hannesson 1983). As a consequence, ITEs inherently increase through productivity growth
(technical change, technical efficiency, size economies), investment in capital stock,
increases in other inputs, and improvements in fishing skill. Allocation of ITEs gratis transfers

16

public wealth to the private sector players, but helps create acceptance of the program, and
through transfers among players, players themselves – rather than the public sector –
finance effort reduction. Allocation formulae are numerous and face inadequate
documentation and political concerns, but equal allocation to individuals or groups based on
a physical measure of the size of capital stock or numbers of persons involved are potential
approaches that help circumvent these issues. In spite of their short-comings, ITEs remain a
promising if largely untested form of rights-based management for complex multispecies
tropical fisheries, and hence a first-best policy option, and decidedly deserve further
consideration. Because of administrative and transactions costs, ITEs might best be applied
to larger and/or more profitable vessels.
Vessel or license buyback programs have largely been used in developed countries,
but also in Malaysia and high seas tuna longline fisheries in the Pacific (Hatcher 1998,
Holland, Gudmundsson, and Gates 1999, Kirkley and Squires 1999, World Bank 2004,
Curtis and Squires 2004). The general view of their effectiveness is that buyback programs
seldom effectively reduce fishing effort over the long term and restore stock size, but can
help stem further deterioration in resource stocks. Buybacks also tend, in practice, to remove
the largely inactive vessels that hold licences. Buybacks that restore profitability also give
breathing room for players to figure out what to do next and enhance positive economic
behavior, since players behave very differently when a fishery is profitable.
The key issue of concern for Thailand and other developing countries is the likely
high cost of an effective program and who finances it, the public or private sector. Willmann,
Boonchuwong, and Piumsombun (2001) estimate that the necessary 25 percent reduction in
the Thai trawler fleet requires at least US$136 million, effectively precluding a vessel
buyback program financed by either the private or public sectors of Thailand. A potentially
valuable role exists for the international community, such as proposed by the World Bank
(2004), in financing transparent, market-based buyback systems without spillovers to other
fisheries (moral hazard) for a management program that might not otherwise pass a strict

17

cost-effectiveness test compared to the opportunity cost of such funds if domestically
supplied and appropriately shadow-priced.
Co-management and Decentralization of Fisheries Management
Effectiveness of fisheries management can be improved by more than “sticks” such
as enhanced enforcement, but also by creating positive incentives through co-management
coupled with decentralization of fisheries management from the capital city, Bangkok, to the
provinces and districts.12 Co-management reshapes, “…the state interventions so as to
institutionalize collaboration between administration and resource users and end those
unproductive situations where they are pitted against one another as antagonistic actors in
the process of resource regulation.” (Baland and Platteau 1996, p. 347) Co-management
thus increases the ability to effectively monitor and enforce a limited access program and
strengthens incentives for cooperation and conservation. Such a program has to rely on the
cooperation and participation of the industry with the government (Ahmed et al. 1997,
Nielsen et al. 2004), thereby promoting cooperation between fishers and the Department of
Fisheries.

Co-management would enhance the economic incentives of fishers toward

investing in future catches by reducing current catches through limited fishing effort. Comanagement could also help in the establishment of protected areas for spawning grounds
or areas of threatened biodiversity. As part of the process of co-management,
decentralization of the state’s fishery management would strengthen the hand of local and
regional government, which in turn would further enhance co-management by shortening the
chain of communication, reducing the number of parties involved, and align local
government incentives with local events.
Co-management in the Gulf of Thailand has been implemented, in part, by the
government in coastal areas – especially in Bang Sapan Bay, through community-based
fisheries management. These projects aim to alter the perceptions and attitudes of fishers
from that of a user to a manager. Activities on grouping, training, social development
programs, and fish landing site management, which unite fishers and their communities,
including awareness-building and participation in resource conservation, have been

18

implemented in the target villages. Regular meetings among working committees of each
village have been organized to monitor the progress and problems of implementation. Visits
to the target villages have also been regularly carried out. When the fishers learn how to
manage and conserve the fisheries resources for sustainable utilization in the near future,
the laws governing the provision of fishing grounds in their village or group of villages as part
of village property and as a source of their livelihood will be extended to them.
Area-Based Rights
The effectiveness of the limited access or use right for any gear type might be
enhanced, to some degree, by further attenuating the access right to a specific and naturally
definable geographic area, creating a well-defined group with exclusive access (use), and
thereby restructure and enhance fishers’ incentives, creating an area licensing scheme (cf.
Wilen 1988).13 To the extent that such a geographic focusing for a gear type can be
meaningfully defined, implemented, monitored and enforced, the numbers and homogeneity
of players in the non-cooperative strategic game may be reduced to an extent that may
make coordinated group action a Pareto-dominant strategy from each player’s standpoint.14
In essence, a common use right is created. The key point here is that players’ incentives
require restructuring and redirection toward cooperation and investing in future catches by
reducing current catches, and that geographically tailoring the access (use) or property right
– perhaps further customized by gear type -- may be one way to nudge incentives in this
direction.
Such an approach of area limited access has been applied in Malaysia through
creating zones for certain vessel sizes and gear types (Ooi 1990). Establishment of a similar
system of zonal license areas for many or all gear types could be established in Thailand,
although it should be noted that monitoring and enforcement is critical for such a system to
effectively function. In Malaysia, enforcement of zonal license areas relies, in part, upon
reporting by legal fishers of illegal fishers, i.e. self-policy, which is enhanced by the colorcoded demarcation of vessels and zones (different zones have different colors, which are
prominently displayed on the vessel).

19

Complementary Conservation Measures
Additional policies can complement and strengthen the effectiveness of a fishery
management program built upon limited access or use rights, co- management,
decentralization, and well-defined user groups such as areas and gears. One of these
consists of establishing a minimum mesh size (especially for the cod end of trawl gear to 4
cm) and perhaps mesh design (e.g. square versus diamond for trawls) through at-sea gear
research to both increase yield per recruit through enhanced survival and growth of smallsized fish that can escape the net. Another conservation policy prohibits fishing by all type of
fishing gear at all times in the protected areas of critical habitats such as coral reef,
seagrasses, and mangroves, which are important nursing and spawning grounds of several
living marine resources.
Trash Fish
Effective policies that substantially reduce catches of “trash” fish are not easy to
introduce because of the monitoring and enforcement required for effective implementation,
the limited product transformation possibilities under a vessel’s joint production, and the
growing economic incentives to catch fish of all species as resource stocks of the most
desirable species are overfished. A large proportion of “trash” fish consists of juveniles or
species with limited market value. To the extent that fleet sizes (and hence fishing effort) are
reduced and even redirected through license limitation, some relief to catches of “trash” fish
may be found (a negative expansion effect). Similarly, reducing fishing effort in inshore
areas, where juvenile fish are often found, can reduce catches of “trash” fish. Limitations on
types of gear and on smaller mesh sizes and perhaps different mesh designs can also lower
catches of “trash” fish. Moreover, as a fishery deteriorates to low resource stock levels,
catches of species that were formerly “trash” fish – either juveniles of “targeted” species or
bycatch of previously undesirable species – may now become valued in their own right as a
“target” species for consumption or fish meal. In this case, policies to reduce what was
formerly “trash” fish really becomes, in effect, policies to reduce overall fishing effort in a
fishery facing substantial levels of biological and economic overfishing.

20

7. Concluding Remarks
This study estimated Schaefer and Fox bioeconomic models of demersal and “trash”
fish in the Gulf of Thailand to provide an overview analysis and an effective foundation for a
set of policies for the utilization and management of the demersal fisheries. The results from
both models indicate that demersal fish stocks are both biologically and economically
overfished and subject to both biological and economic overfishing. The fishery could earn
additional economic rents by curtailing both excessive fishing effort and exploitation rates.
Whether maximum sustainable or economic yields (modified by the Precautionary Principle)
serve as the sustainable target yield in comparison to unregulated open access, the direction
of Pareto-improving policy that also enhances the biological basis of the demersal fishery is
clear.
The cornerstone to effective conservation and management of the Gulf of Thailand
demersal fisheries is effective implementation of the current license limitation program for all
gear types enhanced by co-management, decentralization of management, and areaspecific considerations. This limited access policy includes prohibiting construction of new
trawlers and phasing out of the biologically destructive push net fishery. The limited access
program might also be tailored to specific geographic areas for some gear types to both
protect juvenile species in inshore areas, reduce gear conflicts by separating some gear
types (e.g. trawlers and artisanal gear), and potentially enhance conservation and economic
incentives by limiting players in an area. Cod end mesh size limits for trawl gear are also
warranted.
Monitoring and enforcement are critical for the compliance that underpins all effective
fisheries

conservation

and

management.

Decentralization

of

authority,

enhanced

coordination among government agencies, self-policing, co-management, and improved
funding would all greatly contribute in this regard. In addition, a lump sum license fee for
gear types that are sufficiently profitable to bear such a fee serves as a double dividend tax
that both reduces fishing effort and helps fund monitoring and enforcement and
implementation in general. Effort reduction requires serious consideration of rights-based

21

management in the form of transferable effort quotas for players – individuals or groups, an
imperfect and largely untested approach, but the most potentially tractable property right
available in complex multispecies fisheries of tropical developing countries.
Optimal resource utilization based solely on achieving economic efficiency
inadequately addresses broader social issues. In this regard, a policy aimed at maximum
sustainable yield, modified by the Precautionary Principle, rather than maximum economic
yield has it advantages, since it helps alleviate employment and distributional concerns in
the Gulf of Thailand fisheries. Side payments from gainers to losers or the disenfranchised,
perhaps financed by license fees or limited access formula favorable to the disenfranchised,
may also help address social issues.
The international community and external funding may be useful in introducing and
funding governance and structural reforms and some management programs such as vessel
buyback programs, experimental individual transferable effort programs, and enhanced
compliance and enforcement. Such programs may require additional funding or impetus.
The ultimate success of a national fisheries policy lies in the correct and timely mix of
fisheries management and non-fisheries development. Only broad-based rural development
will put an end to the continual drift into common resources and major urban centers. In its
absence, fisheries regulation cannot be effective and, if effective, will simply push the
problems into some other sector: unemployed fishers have little choice but to encroach on
reserved forests, mineral concessions and public lands or simply move into the urban
centers creating a host of social and environmental problems.

22

References
Ahmed, M.,(1991), ‘A model to determine benefit obtainable from the management of riverine
fisheries of Bangladesh,’ ICLARM Tech. Rep. 28, 133 p.
Ahmed, M., A.D. Capistrano and M. Hossain, (1997), ‘Experience of partnership models for the comanagement of Bangladesh fisheries,’ Fish. Manage. Ecol. 4: 233-248.
Alam, F., O. Ishak, and D. Squires, (2002), ‘Sustainable fisheries development in the tropics: Trawlers
and license limitation in Malaysia,’ Applied Economics 34:325-337.
Baland, J-M and Platteau, P.-P.,(1996), Halting Degradation of Natural Resources: Is There a Role for
Rural Communities? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barrett, S., (2003), Environment and Statecraft. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Boonchuwongse, P and W. Dechboon, (2002), ‘Socioeconomic assessment of marine fisheries in
Thailand,’ in G.T. Silvestre, L. Garces, C.Z. Luna, M. Ahmed, R.A. Valmonte-Santos, L.
Lachica-Alino, V. Christensen, and D. Pauly (eds). Assessment and Management of Tropical
Coastal Fisheries in Asia. (unpublished report)
Campbell, H. and H. Lindner. (1990) The production of fishing effort and the economic performance of
licence limitation programs, Land Economics 66(1): 56-66.
Chotiyaputta, (1992), ‘Trawl survey of marine resources in the upper Gulf of Thailand from Cholburi to
Surat-tani provinces, 1989,’ Tech. Pap. 2/1992. Mar. Res. Surv. Unit, Bangkok Mar. Fish.
Devel. Cent., Dep. Fish. 48pp.
Christy, F.T., Jr., (1982), ‘Territorial use rights in marine fisheries: Definitions and conditions, FAO
Fisheries Technical Paper No. 227, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Rome.
Chullasorn, S., (1997), ‘Review of small pelagic fisheries in Thailand,’ APFIC: WPMF/97/CR-9, in S.
Chullasorn and C. Chotiyaputta. Fishing Status of Thailand.

Proceeding of the Regional

Workshop on Responsible Fishing, Bangkok, Thailand, 24-27 June, 1997. 450 pp.
Curtis, R. and D. Squires. 2004. ‘Rapporteur’s Report of International Vessel Buyback Workshop,’
March 16-18, 2004. La Jolla, California: NOAA Fisheries and University of California, San
Diego.
Department of Fisheries, Thailand, (1972-1997),

Thai Fishing Vessels Statistics. Department of

Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Bangkok, Thailand.
Department of Fisheries, Thailand, (1997), Fisheries Statistics of Thailand 1995.

No.5/1997.

Fisheries Economics Division, Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and
Cooperatives, Bangkok, Thailand.
Eiamsa-Ard, M. and S. Amornchairojkul, (1997), ‘The marine fisheries of Thailand, with emphasis on
the Gulf of Thailand trawl fishery,’ in G.T. Silvestre and D. Pauly, eds., Status and
Management of Tropical Coastal Fisheries in Asia. ICLARM Conference Proceedings 53, 208
pp.
FAO (1995), World Fisheries: Problems and Prospects. FAO Committee on Fisheries Document.
COFI/95/3 Inf 3: 13, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.

23

Fournier, D.A., J. Hampton and J. R. Sibert, (1998), ‘MULTIFAN-CL: a length-based, age-structured
model for fisheries stock assessment, with application to South Pacific albacore, Thunus
alalunga,’ Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 55: 2105-2116.
Fox, W.W., (1970), ‘An exponential surplus model for optimizing exploited fish population.’
Transactions of the American Fisheries Society, 99: 80-88.
Hannesson, R., (1983), ‘ Bioeconomic production function in fisheries: Theoretical and empirical
analysis,’ Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada, 40: 968-982.
Hatcher, A. 1998. ‘Summary of the Workshop on Overcapacity, Overcapitalization and Subsidies in
Europrean Fisheries,’ held October 28-30, 1998. ttp://www.pbs.port.ac.uk/econ/cemare/M44/.
Hilborn, R., Walters, C. J., 1992. Quantitative Fisheries Stock Assessment: Choice, Dynamics and
Uncertainty. Chapman and Hall, New York.
Holland, D., E. Gudmundsson, and J. Gates. 1999. ‘Do vessel buyback programs work: A survey of
the evidence,’ Marine Policy 23: 47-69.
Intong, S., C. Chotiyaputta and T. Anukul, (1993), ‘Otter board trawl surveyed in the inner Gulf of
Thailand,’ in S. Chullasorn and C. Chotiyaputta, eds., Fishing Status of Thailand. Proceeding
of the Regional Workshop on Responsible Fishing, Bangkok, Thailand, 24-27 June. 450 pp.
Jensen, F. and N. Vestergaard, (2000), ‘Moral hazard problems in fisheries: The case of illegal
landings,’ Resource and Energy Economics, 24(4): 281-299.
Jensen, F. and N. Vestergaard, (2002a), ‘Regulation of renewable resources in federal systems: the
case of fishery in the EU,,’ Marine Resource Economics, 16: 277-291.
Jensen, F. and N. Vestergaard, (2002b), ‘A principal-agent analysis of fisheries,’ Journal of
Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 158 (2): 276-285.
Jirapanpipat, K., (1992), ‘Declines of the multispecies trawl fishery in the Gulf of Thailand,’ in

S.

Chullasorn and C. Chotiyaputta, 1997. Fishing Status of Thailand. Proceeding of the Regional
Workshop on Responsible Fishing, Bangkok, Thailand, 24-27 June. 450 pp.
Kirkley, J. and D. Squires. 1999. Measuring Capacity and Capacity Utilization in Fisheries in D.
Greboval, ed., Managing Fishing Capacity. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 386. Rome: Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Meemeskul, Y., 1982, ‘Species and size composition of trash fish from otter board trawl monitoring
survey by Pramong 2 and Pramong 9 in the Gulf of Thailand, 1980,’ in S. Chullasorn and C.
Chotiyaputta 1997. Fishing Status of Thailand. Proceeding of the Regional Workshop on
Responsible Fishing, Bangkok, Thailand, 24-27 June. 450 pp
Natural Research Council (United States), Committee to Review Individual Fishing Quotas, (1999),
Sharing the Fish: Toward a National Policy of Individual Fishing Quotas, Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 436 pp.
Nielsen, J., P. Degnbol, K. Viswanathan, and M. Ahmed, (2004), ‘Fisheries Comanagement: Lessons
from Asia and Africa,’ Marine Policy 28(2): 151-160.
Ooi Jin Bee, (1990), Development Problems of an Open-Access Resource: The Fisheries of
Peninsular Malaysia. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

24

Ostrom, E., (1990), Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Panayotou, T.

and S. Jetanavanich, (1987), ‘ The economics and management of Thai marine

fisheries,’ ICLARM Stud Rev 14, 82 p. International Center for Living Aquatic Resources
Management, Manila, Philippines and Winrock International Institute for Agricultural
Development, Arkansas, USA.
Pinkerton, E., ed., (1989), Cooperative Management of Local Fisheries. Vancouver: University of
British Columbia Press.
Piumsombun, S., (1992), Bio-economic Modeling of Pla-tu in the Gulf of Thailand. Canada: Ph.D.
Thesis, Simon Fraser University, Canada.
Pomeroy, R. and F. Berkes. 1997. ‘Two to tango: The role of government in fisheries comanagement,’ Marine Policy 21: 465-480.
Posner, R., (1977), Economic Analysis of Law, Boston: Little, Brown, & Co.
Quinn and R. Deriso, (1999), Quantitative Fish Dynamics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Salvanes, K. and D. Squires, (1995), ‘Transferable quotas, enforcement costs and typical firms: an
empirical application to the Norwegian trawler fleet,’ Environmental and Resource Economics,
6: 1-21.
Schaefer, M., (1957), ‘Some aspects of the dynamics of populations important to the management of
commercial marine fisheries,’ Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 14 :669681..
Scott, A., (1993), ‘Obstacles to fishery self-government,’ Marine Resource Economics 8 : 187-199.
Scott, A. 2000. ‘Introducing Property in Fishery Management,’ In R. Schotten, ed.,
Use of Property Rights in Fisheries Management. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper
404/1. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Sections
3 and 4.
Seabright, P., (1997), ‘Is co-operation habit forming ?’ in P. Dasgupta and K.-G. Mäler, eds., The
Environment and Emerging Development Issues, Vol. II, Oxford : Oxford University Press.
Smith, I.R., (1981), ‘Improving fishing incomes when resources are overfished,’ Marine Policy 5 : 1722.
Squires, D., H. Campbell, S. Cunningham, C. Dewees, R.Q. Grafton, S. Herrick, J. Kirkley, S. Pascoe,
K. Salvanes, B. Shallard, B. Turris, and N. Vestergaard, (1998), ‘Individual transferable
quotas in multispecies fisheries,’ Marine Policy, 22(2): 135-159.
Squires, D. 1992. ‘Productivity measurement in common property resource industries,’ RAND Journal
of Economics
Squires, D., O.Ishak, Y. Jeon, J. Kirkley, K. Kuperan, and I. Susilowati, (2003), ‘Excess capacity and
sustainable development in Java Sea fisheries,’ Environment and Development Economics
8 : 105-127.
Sripanpaiboon, S., (1995), ‘Species size composition and catch rate of trash fish by commercial
trawler in the Gulf of Thailand, 1992-1993,’ S. Chullasorn, and C. Chotiyaputta, 1997. Fishing

25

Status of Thailand. Proceeding of the Regional Workshop on Responsible Fishing, Bangkok,
Thailand, 24-27 June. 450 p.
Suvapepun, (1995), ‘Overview of the marine fishery environment status of Thailand,’ p.1-2. in
Proceeding of the International Seminar on Marine Fisheries Environment, 9-10 March 1995,
EMDEC & JICA. 359p.
Townsend, R., (1990), ‘Entry restrictions in the fishery: a survey of the evidence,’ Land Economics
66: 359-378.
Townsend, R. and S. Pooley (1994) ‘Fractional licenses: An alternative to license buy-backs,’ Land
Economics, 70(3): 141-143.
Tussing, A.R. et al., (1974), Fisheries of the Indian Ocean: Issues of International Management and
the Law of the Sea. Washington, D.C.
United Nations, (2002), Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development. Johannesburg,
South Africa, 26 August – 4 September 2002. United Nations, New York.
Vadhanakul, S., Y. Meemeskul, and S. Pramokchutima, (1985), ‘An analysis of demersal fish taken
from otter board trawling survey in the Gulf of Thailand, 1981,’ in S. Chullasorn, S. and C.
Chotiyaputta, 1997. Fishing Status of Thailand. Proceeding of the Regional Workshop on
Responsible Fishing, Bangkok, Thailand, 24-27 June. 450 p.
Weitzman, M., (1974), ‘Free Access vs. Private Ownership as Alternative Systems for Managing
Common Property, Journal of Economic Theory, 8(2): 225-234.
Wilen, J., (1979), ‘Fisherman behavior and the design of efficient fisheries regulation programs,’
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada, 36: 855-858.
Wilen, J., (1988), ‘Limited entry licensing: a retrospective assessment,’ Marine Resource Economics
5: 313-324.
World Bank. 2004. Saving Fish and Fishers: Toward Sustainable and Equitable Governance of the
Global Fishing Sector. Report No. 29090-GLB. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

26

Table1 Number of fishing vessel in the Gulf of Thailand, 1972-1997.
Year

Otter board trawl

Pair trawl

Push net

1972

2,813

702

1,232

1973

3,927

824

1,470

1974

3,595

854

1,062

1975

3,397

850

933

1976

3,735

814

697

1977

4,536

878

946

1978

4,610

804

1,137

1979

6,273

1,120

1,394

1980

7,192

1,092

1,644

1981

5,285

910

883

1982

8,030

1,306

1,244

1983

6,849

1,180

941

1984

6,745

1,072

777

1985

6,108

1,122

663

1986

5,416

1,060

579

1987

5,343

1,078

554

1988

4,997

1,046

490

1989

8,825

1,943

1,111

1990

8,686

1,929

1,119

1991

6,941

1,822

765

1992

6,367

1,661

634

1993

6,242

1,539

663

1994

5,531

1,508

543

1995

5,463

1,392

534

1996

5,912

1,610

620

1997

6,036

1,561

771

Source: Department of Fisheries, 1972-1997.

27

Table 2. Nominal Fishing Effort by Gear Type for Demersal and Trash Fish in the Gulf of
Thailand, 1971-1995 (‘000 hours)
Otter
Pair
Beam
Year
Trawl
Trawl
Trawl
1971
7,036
1,050
179
1972 10,268
1,349
980
1973 13,992
1,268
1,172
1974 12,159
1,312
593
1975 10,942
1,004
52
1976 11,352
1,302
475
1977 13,826
1,709
2,003
1978 12,151
1,292
753
1979 13,747
1,408
813
1980 11,109
1,266
691
1981 10,944
1,161
644
1982 12,402
1,116
1,364
1983 12,651
1,322
387
1984 11,452
1,195
248
1985 12,178
1,172
169
1986 14,551
1,554
96
1987 15,327
1,794
32
1988 14,395
1,748
53
1989 13,311
1,645
54
1990 13,808
1,610
54
1991 11,484
1,275
43
1992 10,492
1,220
31
1993 10,062
1,423
35
1994 11,922
1,324
125
1995 11,529
1,620
87
Source: Department of Fisheries, Thailand

Push
Net
988
467
1,732
1,147
1,251
930
1,531
1,636
1,540
1,534
1,189
2,553
1,234
948
723
616
645
456
457
459
694
450
594
700
543

28

Purse
Seine
0
0
0
0
0
0
686
242
722
709
691
972
1,430
1,401
1,287
1,527
1,374
1,647
1,435
2,041
1,019
1,114
1,154
1,045
1,873

Gill
Nets
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
162
639
408
375
352
432
467
613
722
698
740
472
554
1,745
406
403
268
420

Total
9,252
13,064
18,164
15,211
13,248
14,059
19,070
15,832
17,508
14,600
13,940
17,435
15,593
13,844
14,243
16,816
17,798
16,652
15,467
15,931
13,496
12,193
12,114
14,071
13,780

Table 3. Total catch, standard fishing effort, and catch per unit of effort, 1971-1995
Year
Total Catch
Total Standardized Fishing
Catch Per Unit of
(metric ton)
Effort
Standardized Effort
(hours)
(kg/hour)
1971
395,728
11,876,715
33.32
1972

656,695

14,540,695

45.16

1973

723,422

19,705,566

36.71

1974

656,601

17,177,347

38.22

1975

657,952

15,406,302

42.71

1976

622,349

15,767,966

39.47

1977

639,212

20,418,085

31.31

1978

522,979

17,359,494

30.13

1979

645,951

21,109,841

30.60

1980

625,453

17,523,633

35.69

1981

692,330

16,713,349

41.42

1982

707,190

21,007,226

33.66

1983

647,764

20,110,684

32.21

1984

585,004

18,760,727

31.18

1985

711,164

18,256,176

38.95

1986

888,945

22,938,792

38.75

1987

1,028,110

24,266,210

42.37

1988

920,622

23,363,011

39.41

1989

903,741

21,116,546

42.80

1990

880,614

22,366,674

39.37

1991

774,104

20,549,582

37.67

1992

816,095

16,528,634

49.37

1993

869,601

16,988,426

51.19

1994

852,428

18,619,483

45.78

1995

895,711

19,934,393

44.93

Source: Department of Fisheries, 1972 – 1997.
Note: Total catch includes demersal “target” and “trash” fish of all species caught in
demersal fisheries.
Standardized fishing effort is standardized across gear types to 14-18 m otter
trawl vessels.

29

Table 4. The Formulae Used To Fit The Schaefer And Fox Production Models And Estimate
The Relevant Parameters.

Catch-effort relationship
Linear relationship
between catch per unit
of effort and fishing
effort

Schaefer model

Fox model

Yt   ft -  ft

Y  fe (   f )

2

Yt
)     ft
ft

Yt
    ft
ft

ln(

fMSY 

fMSY  

Maximum sustainable
yield (MSY)


2
2
MSY 
4

Total revenue (TR)

TR  p( ft -  ft )

TR  pfe(   f )

Marginal revenue (MR)

MR  p(  2 ft )

MR  p (f  e f  e f )

Average revenue (AR)
The level of effort that
maximizes economic
yeild (fMEY)
Maximum economic
yeild (MEY)
Maximum economic rent
(MER)

AR  p(   ft )

AR  pe(   f )

Level of fishing effort at
MSY (fMSY)

Nash equilibrium level of
fishing effort in open
access



1
MSY   e  1



2

fMEY 

1

(c  p )
2 p

c
 fMEY  e fMEY  e fMEY
p

2
MEY   fMEY -  fMEY

MEY  pfMEY e(   fMEY )

2
MER  p( fMEY -  fMEY
)  cfMEY

MER  pfMEY e(   fMEY )  cfMEY
c
ln( )  
p
fOA 

fOA 

(c  p )
p



Where:
Yt denotes yield or total landing of fish at time t,
ft is fishing effort at time t,
α and β are parameters of the Schaefer model.
λ and θ are parameters of the Fox model
p is the constant price of the catch
c is the constant marginal, When estimating the level of effort that maximizes economic
rents (fMER) the marginal revenue (MR) and marginal cost of fishing are equated.

30

Table 5. Distribution of Vessel Sizes and Annual Costs of Trawl and Push Nets by Size of
Fishing Vessel in the Gulf of Thailand, 1995
Type
of Size of Vessel No. of Fishing Average
Amount Cost
Fishi
(meters)
Units
annual
cost (Baht x 106)
ng
Gear
(Baht/unit)
Otter Trawl

< 14

1,784

825,380

1,472.49

14-18

1,948

1,556,740

3,032.53

18-25

1,496

2,275,200

3,403.70

Subtotal
Pair Trawl

7,908.71
< 14

16

1,947,864

31.17

14-18

186

2,702,003

502.27

18-25

491

4,608,520

2,262.78

Subtotal
Push Net

2,796.52
< 14

402

614,107

246.87

14-18

85

1,173,753

99.77

18-25

35

2,306,508

80.73

Subtotal

427.37

Grand Total

11,132.60

Source: Fisheries Economic Division, Department of Fisheries

31

Table 6. Estimation Results for Schaefer and Fox Models
Schaefer Model
Variable

Estimated

Fox Model

Standard t-Ratio Variable

Estimated

Coefficient Error
Intercept (α)

57.1346

Fishing effort 8.2173E-07

Coefficient Error

Ratio

4.1903

0.0308

136.07

1.0667E-

24.88

1.5892

35.95

Intercept (λ)

5.5049E-

14.9273

Fishing effort 2.7533E-08

08

(f) (β)

Standard t-

09

(f) (θ)

Adj. R2 0.90

Adj. R2 0.96

Standard
Error 4.0619
Overall
F
222.82, df 24
No.
Observations
25

Standard
Error 0.0787
Overall
F
618.82, df 24
No.
Observations
25

Table 7. Catch, Revenues, Costs, Profits at Different Levels of Effort for Schaefer Model
Items

Revenues
(Baht x 106)

Costs
(Baht x 106)

Profit
(Baht x 106)

MSY

Effort
Catch
(x 106 std. (x 103 tons)
hours)
34.76
993

6,634

2,422

4,212

MEY

28.42

960

6,413

1,980

4,433

Open
Access
Equilibrium
Actual
(1995)

56.84

593

3,960

3,960

0

56.62

896

5,983

3,945

2,039

32

Table 8. Catch, Revenues, Costs, Profits at Different Levels of Effort for Fox Model
Items

Effort

Catch

(x 106 std. (x 103 tons)

Revenues

Costs

Profit

(Baht x 106)

(Baht x 106)

(Baht x 106)

hours)
MSY

37.69

916

6,116

2,626

3,491

MEY

25.86

860

5,745

1,802

3,943

Open
69.56
725
4,846
4,846
0
Access
Equilibrium
Actual
56.62
896
5,983
3,945
2,039
(1995)
Note: Total catch includes demersal “target” and “trash” fish of all species caught in
demersal fisheries.

Figure 1. Total Catch (metric tons) of Demersal and Trash Fish in the Gulf of Thailand, 19711995
1,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000

19
93

19
91

19
89

19
87

19
85

19
83

19
81

19
79

19
77

19
75

19
73

19
71

0

Year

Source: Department of Fisheries, Thailand
Note: Total catch (metric tons) includes demersal “target” and “trash” fish of all species
caught in demersal fisheries.

33

Figure 2. Estimated Schaefer and Fox Model Results for Demersal Fisheries in the Gulf of
Thailand

Revenues&Costs
(Bahtsx10^6)

MEY

MSY

6,634
6,413
6,116
5,745

TC=c*fi
Open
access

4,846

Open access
TR=P*Y

3,960

37.69
25.86 28.42
56.84
34.76
Standard Efforts(St hrx10^6)

34

69.56

Endnotes
More formally, our comparative statics analysis compares the Pareto-inefficient, non-cooperative
Nash equilibrium of open access with the Pareto-efficient cooperative equilibrium, MEY. These two
benchmark equilibriums, when the resource stock is in steady-state equilibrium, correspond to the
open-access and sole-owner bionomic equilibriums traditionally discussed under the bioeconomic
framework. The full cooperative equilibrium could arise from a sole owner, completely structured
private or common property (the latter with effective management), or some other form of cooperation
or fully structured property right (Ballard and Platteau 1996)
1

The traditional bioecoomic model implicitly assumes that there is an aggregate input and output due
to homothetic input-output separability, a homogeneous habitat, and a population that is perfectly
mixed throughout, or that there is non-joint production with a perfectly allocable composite input
(fishing effort). Moroever, an analysis disaggregated by gear type and/or species has its own set of
limitations, including presumed nonjointness. For example, bioeconomic models for a single gear type
do not incorporate all sources of fishing mortality on the multispecies resource stocks, and thereby do
not provide fully accurate empirical results for a policy aimed at all sources of fishing mortality on a
given set of resource stocks. Moreover, policy conclusions from a single-gear bioeconomic analysis
do not consider spillover effects from these other gear. Bioeconomic models for a single species in a
multispecies fishery, even if incorporating all gear types, clearly do not capture all multi-species
interactions in the population dynamics and implicitly assume nonjointness. In short, there are clear
advantages and disadvantages for the different possible levels of aggregation. In this paper we are
concerned with the overview status of the demersal fisheries of the Gulf of Thailand.
2

The background discussion draws from Boonchuwongse and Dechboon (2002), Chullasorn (1997),
Jirapanpipat (1992), Sripanpaiboon (1995), Suvapepun (1995), and Vadhanakul, Meemeskul, and
Pramokchutima (1985).
3

In addition, a major advantage of aggregating multiple species is in specification of fishing effort, and
implicitly, the capital stock. As a general rule according to economic principles, capital services or
fishing effort when production is joint cannot be allocated among different outputs or species. We
thank an anonymous referee for raising these points.
4

To be perfectly clear, the directed demersal fishery on the “target” species focuses upon demersal
species. However, part of the catch – “trash” fish -- is comprised of juveniles of “target” demersal
species, which are of small size and lesser or no market value, and bycatch of other, non-demersal
species, which often have little or no commercial value. Thus, these bycatch species are undesirable
outputs and there is joint production with desirable and undesirable outputs with unknown product
transformation possibilities. In addition, the bycatch is comprised largely of demersal species, but also
includes some pelagic species, Cepharopod, crab, shrimp. molluscs, and others. (Most trawl gear
drag along the sea bottom, and hence bring up some animals from the benthic community plus other
animals that dwell in the lower reaches of the water column.)
5

OLS estimation when there is f (fishing effort) on both sides of the CPUE equation is standard
practice in the estimation of bioeconomic models. In addition, this is a standard approach to dealing
with a common form of heteroscedasticity. If f is exogenous as a fixed explanatory variable, then
division by f does not introduce simultaneous equation bias and inconsistent estimates of the
regression coefficients since f is fixed. The fixed explanatory variables paradigm automatically leads
to a lack of correlation between the disturbance term and the explanatory variable f (which in turn give
consistent estimates). In contrast, when the explanatory variable f (along with the data on the
response variable catch) is assumed to be random samples drawn from the population, fixed
explanatory variables cannot be identically distributed across observations and the random sampling
assumption technically excludes the classical regression model. We can reasonably consider f to be
exogenous as a fixed explanatory variable, as opposed to a random sample, since the data are
population data obtained by aggregating over all observations, vessels, and most gear types.
6

Additional factors often make ITQs problematic in many (although not all) developing countries,
especially when there are multiple species. Total allowable catches have to be calculated for each
7

35

species or assemblage, which is often exceedingly difficult in tropical multispecies fisheries of
developing countries, particularly with age-structured or synthetic models with their demanding data
requirements. ITQs are generally assigned to fishers based on species-by-species catch histories,
which are often non-existent due to the absence of accurate census of fishers and catch histories.
This limitation is particularly problematic, since the state’s initial allocation of private property rights
assigns wealth and income flows from the formerly state-owned resource stocks; this distributive
impact is the most contentious part of any ITQ program. Only when the traditional users of a resource
are made private owners or when the proceeds from the sale of property rights in the resource are
remitted to the former users does the competitive private property equilibrium unequivocally Paretodominate the alternatives. (See Baland and Platteau (1996) and Weitizman (1974) for further
discussion along these lines.) Moreover, limited infrastructure – biological to make population
assessments for the total allowable catches, informational to establish well-functioning quota markets
with minimal transactions and information costs, and administrative for compliance through monitoring
and enforcement of the property right – also make ITQ programs difficult to establish in many
developing countries.
8

Much of the discussion in this section builds upon the recommendations first posited by Panayotou
and Jetanavanich (1987).
9

Under the 1947 Fisheries Act, a series of ministerial rules and regulations concerning the
conservation of marine resources has been issued in six groups: (1). Prohibition of the use of certain
types of fishing gear during the spawning and breeding seasons of some commercially important
species; (2) Prohibition of certain types of fishing gear in some areas; (3) Protected areas are those
adjacent to temples and monasteries or any other area designated as such by the governors of
provinces. All such areas are considered as fish sanctuaries where fishing of any sort is not permitted;
(4) Prohibition in catching of endangered and threatened species; (5) Ban on the use of poisons and
stupefying chemicals, explosives and electric stunning; and (6), Prohibition and restrictions on certain
types and sizes of fishing gear.
In 1978, the Thai Cabinet adopted a resolution to take measures to control and reduce the number
of trawlers and push nets. The basic objective of a ministry regulation issued in March, 1990 is to
gradually reduce the number of trawlers and push nets and thereby bring down demersal catches to
the optimum sustainable level.
10

Without a fishery management program that directly and comprehensively addresses the illstructured property right, a problem of asymmetric information and moral hazard is created between
the principal (fishery manager) and the agents (fishers) (Salvanes and Squires 1995, Jensen and
Vestergaard (2000, 2002ab), Squires et al 2003, Kirkley and Squires 1999). This information problem
arises because the fishery manager does not have complete information about all variables relevant
for regulation (Jensen and Vestergaard 2002b). Hence, the regulator cannot easily and at low cost
monitor and enforce the number of vessels, the zones they fish in, gear conflicts, levels of harvest and
species composition, discards and illegal landings, levels and mixes of inputs, and the like. In turn, the
fishers face economic incentives to shirk through avoiding license registration, payment of license
fees and other taxes, ignoring gear regulations and other requirements for monitoring, enforcement,
and regulation.
11

For additional discussion of co-management in fisheries see (Ahmed et al. 1997, Nielsen et al.2004,
Pinkerton 1989, Pomeroy and Berkes 1997) and for rural development in general see Baland and
Platteau (1996).
12

When the area of access is sufficiently restricted and a well-defined group of resource exploiters is
created, cooperative behavior by the individual players should be boosted. This has been found to
improve the conservation and management for other types of common-pool resources (Ballard and
Platteau 1996, Ostrom 1990, Seabright 1997). When area use rights are actually assigned, thereby
creating a more well-specified property right than limited access (largely through enhancing the
exclusive use and universality characteristics), such a program is called territorial use rights for
fisheries or TURFs (Christy 1982). A management strategy predicated on well-defined areas or even
TURFs might or might not be fully effective, and little evidence, if any, is available for commercial
13

36

fishing in developing countries. Nonetheless, the idea has theoretical merit and has worked with other
common-pool resources, and hence deserves serious consideration, particularly when developed
through co-management.
More technically, non-cooperation is often the initial dominant strategy for each vessel and a
Pareto-inefficient Nash equilibrium and overfishing of the resource stock remain the expected
outcome without alternative measures under open access. The intent of these measures is to help
transform the underlying non-cooperative game to a cooperative one. The process of treaty
negotiation can be borrowed from international environmental agreements, since this process
transforms strategic incentives and non-cooperation into cooperation. See Barrett (2003) for additional
discussion.
14

37

