AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806
DOI 10.1007/s13280-011-0156-2

REVIEW PAPER

Paying for International Environmental Public Goods
Rodrigo Arriagada, Charles Perrings

Received: 21 December 2010 / Revised: 20 April 2011 / Accepted: 29 April 2011 / Published online: 2 June 2011

Abstract Supply of international environmental public
goods must meet certain conditions to be socially efficient,
and several reasons explain why they are currently undersupplied. Diagnosis of the public goods failure associated
with particular ecosystem services is critical to the development of the appropriate international response. There are
two categories of international environmental public goods
that are most likely to be undersupplied. One has an
additive supply technology and the other has a weakest link
supply technology. The degree to which the collective
response should be targeted depends on the importance of
supply from any one country. In principle, the solution for
the undersupply lies in payments designed to compensate
local providers for the additional costs they incur in
meeting global demand. Targeted support may take the
form of direct investment in supply (the Global Environment Facility model) or of payments for the benefits of
supply (the Payments for Ecosystem Services model).
Keywords International environmental public goods 
Ecosystem services  Payments for ecosystem services 
Global environmental public

INTRODUCTION
How can we best secure the provision of international
environmental public goods (IEPGs)—public goods offering benefits that span multiple national jurisdictions? It is
well understood that markets undersupply public goods,
and there is a wealth of evidence that many environmental
public goods have been systematically undersupplied over
a long period of time (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
2005). If environmental public goods occur at the scale of
the nation state or below, the failure of markets to supply

123

public goods may be offset by the actions of local or
national governments. There exist many national agencies
with responsibilities for the provision of environmental
public goods such as habitat for rare and endangered species, clean water, environmental health protection, and so
on. There also exist many offset or mitigation systems for
securing private provision of public goods at a national
level (Madsen et al. 2010). At the international level, where
there is no supranational authority to take responsibility,
the failure of markets to deliver environmental public
goods is more difficult to offset. Depending upon the
magnitude and distribution of the payoffs to public good
provision, individual countries will have a stronger or
weaker incentive to commit resources to their provision.
Doing more than that depends upon agreement between
nation states (Kaul et al. 2003a; Barrett 2007).
Many IEPGs are strictly global. Examples include the
conservation of the genetic diversity on which all future
evolution depends, the mitigation of climate change, the
control of emerging infectious diseases, and the management of sea areas beyond national jurisdiction. Many more
are regional, such as the control of acid rain, the management of multi-country river basins, and the protection of
international watersheds (Touza and Perrings 2011). Like
all public goods, IEPGs exhibit both consumption indivisibilities and non-excludability. Non-excludability means
that once the good is provided, none can be excluded from
enjoying the benefits it confers. Indivisible consumption
occurs when one country’s enjoyment of the benefits does
not diminish the amount available for others. Public goods
are said to be ‘pure’ when they are both non-exclusive and
non-rival (indivisible) in consumption. They are said to be
impure if they are either partially excludable or partially
rival—the most common form of which are local public
goods, particularly the local common pool resources

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

799

analyzed by Ostrom (1990). In most cases, it is not possible
for any single state to provide such goods on its own.
International public good supply depends on either international coordination or international cooperation (Anand
2004).
This article focuses on IEPGs whose benefits extend to
people in multiple countries. Such IEPGs frequently also
deliver benefits across multiple generations (Kaul et al.
1999), but we do not address this aspect of the problem. In
practice, the beneficiaries of international public goods
include national populations and their representatives,
nation states, transnational corporations and non-governmental organizations, as well as a newly emerging set of
institutions. Globalization has altered the way that members of civil society organize themselves across national
boundaries. The information revolution has also stimulated
new forms of social participation. New networks, frequently built around environmental websites, enable the
exchange of ideas and implementation techniques. These
new relationships and interactions have created a ‘global
environmental public’, interested in asserting new rights
and responsibilities to the resources of the planet. Its
concerns span both the ethical responsibilities of individuals, organizations, countries and corporations, and the
alternative forms of governance of the biosphere.
Following the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, we
suppose that the benefits people obtain from biosphere
depend on a set of ecosystem services comprising:
•

•

•

•

Provisioning services: products people obtain from
ecosystems, such as food, fuel, fiber, fresh water, and
genetic resources.
Cultural services: nonmaterial benefits people obtain
from ecosystems through spiritual enrichment, cognitive development, reflection, recreation, and aesthetic
experiences.
Regulating services: benefits people obtain from the
regulation of ecosystem processes, including air quality
maintenance, climate regulation, erosion control, regulation of floods and droughts, regulation of human
diseases, and water purification.
Supporting services: those that are necessary for the
production of all other ecosystem services, such as
primary production, production of oxygen, and soil
formation.

These services affect human wellbeing in many ways:
through their role in the production of consumption goods,
their support of human health and security, or the satisfaction of peoples’ cultural and spiritual needs. A number
of these services have the characteristics of IEPGs, the
most important of which involve the regulating and supporting services. Figure 1 indicates the relation between
categories of ecosystem services and components of

wellbeing identified by the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment. Of these, only the provisioning services consistently generate benefits that are both divisible (rival) and
exclusive. The other services yield benefits that are generally indivisible and non-exclusive. We focus on the group
of ecosystem services that are both public and international. These are services that: (i) cover more than one
group of countries; (ii) benefit not only a broad spectrum of
countries but also a broad spectrum of the global population; (iii) meet the needs of both present and future generations (Kaul et al. 1999; Anand 2004). International
public goods generated in any one county must therefore
generate spillover effects beyond a nation’s boundary
(Morrissey et al. 2002).
IEPGs can further be classified according to their
‘technology of supply’ (Sandler 2004). The standard
treatment of public goods focuses on demand (Hirshleifer
1983). However, understanding the technology of supply of
IEPGs is critical to the development of appropriate incentives. Three common examples of public good supply
technologies are ‘additive’, ‘best shot’, and ‘weakest link’
technologies. As the name implies, in the additive case, the
socially available amount Y of a public good is nothing but
the ‘simple sum’ of the separate amounts, yi, produced by
each of m participating countries, the i = 1,…, m. In the
case of simple sum public goods, such as carbon sequestration, each unit of carbon sequestered has the same value
no matter where it occurs. In the case of weighted sum
public goods, such as habitat protection, the contribution of
each hectare protected depends on its characteristics
(Sandler 2004). For ‘best shot’ public goods, the benefit to
all countries is determined by the most effective provider.
For example, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are funded by the U.S.A., but provide information
on infectious diseases to all countries. For ‘weakest link’
public goods, the benefits to all countries are limited to the
benefits offered by the least effective provider. The best
example of this is the control of infectious diseases. So for
HIV and tuberculosis, the level of protection available to
all countries is only as good as the control of the disease
exercised in the poorest, most densely populated, and least
well-coordinated country (Perrings et al. 2002).
Social composition functions
X
Y¼
yi Summation
i
Y ¼ min yi Y ¼ min yi
i

i

Weakest-link

Y ¼ max yi
i

Best-shot

Of all the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment ecosystem
services, the regulating services are most often supplied as
IEPGs. Examples include disease control, which is
frequently supplied as a weakest or weaker link public

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

123

800

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

Fig. 1 Linkages between
ecosystem services and human
well-being (arrow’s width
intensity of linkages between
ecosystem services and human
well-being) (adapted from
Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, 2003)

CONSTITUENTS OF WELL-BEING
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
Provisioning
(food, fuel , fiber, fresh water, and
genetic resources)

Supporting
(nutrient
cycling, soil
formation,
and primary
production)

Regulating
(air quality maintenance, climate
regulation, erosion control,
regulation of floods and droughts,
regulation of human diseases, and
water purification)
Cultural
(spiritual enrichment, cognitive
development, reflection,
recreation, and aesthetic
experiences)

ARROW’S COLOR
Potential for mediation by socioeconomic factors
Low

Medium

good, climate regulation through, e.g., carbon sequestration,
which is supplied as an additive pure public good, or
watershed protection which is generally an additive but
impure public good (Holzinger 2001; Dombrowsky 2007;
Touza and Perrings 2011). Many international public goods
are also jointly produced with local public goods.
Biodiversity in tropical forests, for example, yields a set of
private benefits in the form of timber and other products
including medicinal plants, hunting, fishing, recreation, and
tourism. At the same time, tropical forests are a source of
carbon sequestration, genetic information, hydrological and
microclimatic regulation—commonly described as cobenefits (Perrings and Gadgil 2003).
An important feature of IEPG is that their spatial extent
depends partly on the natural hydrological and atmospheric
flows, and partly on the social linkages between countries—the flow of goods, people, and information. The
global reach of carbon sequestration is a property of the
general circulation system, but the global reach of disease
regulation is a property of the global trade and air transportation systems. In fact, the closer integration of the
world economic system has rapidly increased the number
of environmental public goods that are global in reach
(Kaul et al. 2003b):
•

•

New technologies increasingly enhance human mobility as well as the movement of goods, services, and
information around the world (e.g., case of transmission
of human diseases and air pollution as international
environmental public bads).
Economic and political openness have provided further
impetuses to cross borders and transnational activities

123

Security
• Personal safety
• Secure resource access
• Security from disasters
Basic material for good life
• Adequate livelihoods
• Sufficient nutritious food
• Shelter
• Access to goods

Health
• Strength
• Feeling well
• Access to clean air and water

Good social relations
• Social cohesion
• Mutual respect
• Ability to help others

High

•
•

(e.g., case of transmission of human diseases and air
pollution as international environmental public bads).
Systematic risks have increased (e.g., case of climate
change as an international environmental public bad).
International regimes are becoming more influential,
often formulated by small groups of powerful nations
yet often claiming universal applicability (e.g., case of
bio-prospecting contracts to find cure for cancer and
other human diseases).

The central problem addressed in this article is how to
secure environmental public goods that (a) are provided at
particular locations but offer benefits over a wider area, and
(b) generate local benefits that are below the local cost of
supply. These are the IEPGs that are most likely to be
undersupplied. This article is organized in four sections.
The following section reviews the fundamental problem
with IEPGs—the incentive that each country has to free
ride on the efforts of others. A third section then considers
the options for addressing the problem. This reviews the
applicability of currently popular instruments, such as
payments for ecosystem services, in terms of the characteristics of the public good concerned. A final section
draws out the implications for national and international
environmental policy.

WHY ARE INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL
PUBLIC GOODS UNDERPROVIDED?
International environmental public goods generate benefits
that spill over national borders, so that the benefits (or

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

801

costs) of those goods extend beyond the country of origin.
If the marginal local benefits of public good provision are
less than the marginal local costs, there will be no incentive
to provide the public good at all. If the marginal local
benefits of public good provision exceed the marginal local
costs of provision, but benefits also accrue to other countries, there will be an incentive to produce the public good,
but unless the country is a ‘best-shot provider’ it will not be
at a level that would satisfy international demand (Ferroni
and Mody 2002; Kanbur 2003, 2004). We first of all review
the problem and then consider the options for addressing it.
We have elsewhere considered the cases where the national
incentive to produce IEPGs is sufficient to meet global
demand (Touza and Perrings 2011). In this article, we
address the case where independent local action is not
sufficient to secure efficient global supply.
Consider the conservation of endangered species. Can
we rely on the national action to produce the efficient
amount of an IEPG such as the protection of iconic species? The key to understanding this lies in the difference
between a pure public good and a private good. For a
private good, everyone pays the same price, but is free to
consume as much or as little as they want. Consumers
adjust the quantity they consume given the market price.
For a pure public good everyone consumes the same
amount of the ‘‘good’’ but is willing to pay a different price
for it. Consumers adjust the amount they are willing to pay
for the public good given the quantity supplied (Batina and
Ihori 2005). In general, private provision of public goods
will be below the socially optimal level. Efficiency requires
that marginal benefit equals marginal cost. In the case of
conservation of endangered species (or any other public
good), the relevant measure of marginal benefits is social
Fig. 2 Efficient provision of
conservation effort

Costs and
benefits of
local
conservation
effort

‘Incremental
cost’ =
benefits to
global
interests in
excess of
costs
warranted by
local interest
of country i

marginal benefit—the sum of all countries marginal benefits. We illustrate the problem in Fig. 2, in which local and
global benefit curves for species conservation in a particular country, i, are presented. Global benefits are represented by the vertical sum of the benefit curves of country
i, and all other countries.
The level of conservation in country i that maximizes
local net benefits is indicated by yi, while the level of
conservation that maximizes global benefits is indicated by
yi . yi is given by the intersection of local supply and local
benefit curves, and yi by the intersection of local supply
and the vertical sum of local benefits for all countries.
Since the marginal cost of provision at yi is greater than
country i would be willing to accept on its own, socially
optimal provision of the public good depends on the
existence of a mechanism to cover the ‘incremental’ cost of
socially optimal provision to country i.
Biodiversity conservation, like many other IEPGs, is an
impure global public good. If there are many potential
providers, each generates local benefits from its conservation effort, but also benefits from the conservation
actions of others. Following, Perrings and Gadgil (2003),
we characterize the problem for the individual country as
follows. Vi denotes welfare of the ith country, assumed to
depend on consumption of a vector of market goods, xi, and
global biodiversity conservation, denoted C = C(y1,
y2,…,ym), then the problem it faces is of the general form:



Maxxi yi V i xi ; yi ; C y1 ; . . .; ym
In other words, it derives a direct benefit from its own
conservation efforts, yi, but also benefits from the global
conservation effort to which it has contributed, C. If the
cost of conservation effort in terms of the cost of market

Global benefits

Costs of local
conservation effort

Benefits to all other countries
Benefits to country i

yi

yi *

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

Quantity of local
conservation effort

123

802

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

goods is p(yi), and if the income available to country i is Ii,
this will be subject to the constraint that
 
I i ¼ xi þ p yi yi
In the absence of cooperation, and noting that
Vyi i ¼ oV i =oyi ; Vxi i ¼ oV i =oxi and Cyi ¼ oC=oyi , wellbeing
of the ith country will be maximized where the local level
of conservation satisfies:
VYi i
Vi
¼ pyi  ic Cyi
i
V xi
V xi
If global wellbeing
is the sum of the welfare of all
P
countries, V ¼ j¼1 V j , then global wellbeing will be
maximized where
XVj
VYi i
c
i
¼ p yi 
i
i Cy
V xi
V
j¼1 xi
The extra terms in the summation term on the right hand
side capture the conservation benefits that the ith country
confers on all other countries. These benefits will be
neglected by the ith country unless there is a mechanism to
convert them into a direct incentive.
The failure of markets to signal the global benefit of
such public goods accordingly results in under-investment in their local provision. The benefits of protection,
management and establishment of forests provide a good
example. Apart from the loss of the valuable environmental services (e.g., protection of genetic resources, air
quality maintenance, climate regulation and regulation of
human diseases), forest degradation frequently translates
into a loss of timber and non-timber forest products
important to local livelihoods (Landell-Mills & Porras
2002).
Currently, there are few measures of the underprovision of public goods. The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) has opted instead for measures of
‘‘adequate’’ provision that differ from one public good to
another. Such measures can, for example, correspond to
the complete elimination of global public bads. More
generally, they are measures of what is considered possible, given the current state of technology (e.g., to
control—rather than eradicate—the problem of HIV/
AIDS) and what is ‘‘fair’’ (e.g., what would emerge if all
concerned stakeholders had an effective voice in the
decision-making process) (ODS-UNC 2002). The criterion of adequacy is not meant to indicate optimality—the
balancing of marginal costs with the sum of people’s
marginal willingness to pay for a particular public good
(see Samuelson 1954; Cornes and Sandler 1996). Rather,
it is meant to establish a relatively simple, yet reliable,
yardstick for measuring the present provision of a certain
good against a technical notion of adequacy.

123

In the case of the global public good ‘communicable
disease control’, for example, it has been possible, given
the biological characteristics of the infectious agent and
available technologies, to completely eradicate certain
diseases. In these cases, the criterion for adequate provision
is defined as complete eradication, or zero incidences in the
‘‘wild.’’ The determination of ‘‘adequate provision’’ is
based solely on technical considerations, without reference
to costs, benefits or existing preferences and willingness to
pay. Therefore, there may be cases where adequate provision may not be economically feasible. It is important to
assess the net benefits/costs of inaction against the net
benefits/costs of corrective action to determine, at least
approximately, whether meeting the technological
requirements for adequate provision is economically
desirable (UNDP 2002).

POLICY OPTION: PAYMENTS FOR ECOSYSTEM
SERVICES
In principle, the solution to IEPG problems of this form lies
in payments designed to compensate local providers for the
additional costs they incur in meeting global demand.
Indeed, that is the basis on which the Global Environment
Facility (GEF) was founded. The GEF unites 182 member
governments—in partnership with international institutions, nongovernmental organizations, and the private
sector—to address global environmental issues. An independent financial organization, the GEF provides grants to
developing countries and countries with economies in
transition for projects related to biodiversity, climate
change, international waters, land degradation, the ozone
layer, and persistent organic pollutants. These projects
benefit the global environment, linking local, national, and
global environmental challenges, and promoting sustainable livelihoods. The concept of incremental cost, which
notionally determines the payments made by the GEF, is
related to the difference between the cost a country would
be prepared to bear in the provision of an environmental
public good (the cost that would be warranted in terms of
the national benefits generated by the public good) and the
cost of meeting global demand for the same public good
(Pearce 2003, 2005). It is a national payment for an environmental service that is an IEPG.
Systems of Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES)
have become popular instruments for dealing with IEPGs,
in part because they appear to satisfy the incremental cost
principle (Ferraro and Simpson 2002; Goldstein et al. 2006;
Wunder 2007; Ferraro and Kiss 2007; Pagiola 2008; Engel
et al. 2008; Wunder et al. 2008). They are not, however,
appropriate mechanisms in all cases. International PES
schemes are appropriate where non-marketed ecosystem

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

803

services are privately supplied in one country, but offer
benefits that are public and accrue elsewhere.
To illustrate the potential pluses and minuses of PES, we
consider a particular problem: the impact of local deforestation on the provision of a range of IEPGs including
climate regulation (through carbon sequestration), protection of genetic diversity, and watershed protection in
addition to timber and non-timber forest products. The
Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB) study
is a major international initiative to draw attention to the
global economic benefits of biodiversity, to highlight the
growing costs of biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation, and to draw together expertise from the fields of
science, economics and policy to enable practical actions
moving forward. The current assessment of TEEB on PES
has used existing studies to estimate the mean value of both
the macroclimatic regulation offered by terrestrial carbon
sequestration, and the change in provisioning and cultural
services offered by forest systems. Its findings are preliminary but telling. TEEB (TEEB 2009; Kumar 2010)
suggests that the mean values of forest ecosystem services,
in US$/ha/year, are dominated by regulatory functions:
specifically regulation of climate ($1965), water flows
($1360), and soil erosion ($694). The mean value of all
provisioning services combined—timber and non-timber
forest products, food, genetic information, pharmaceuticals—is $1313. This is less than the value of water flow
regulation alone. There are substantial off-site benefits to
forest conservation that are not currently captured by forest
landowners and are difficult to incorporate on PES
schemes.
Governments around the world have frequently implemented forest protection policies in areas high in biodiversity, landscape beauty or critical for their watershed
protection. However, as pressure mounts on governments
to curtail spending and cut budget deficits, their ability to
invest directly in the provision of public goods and services
is compromised. Where public authorities have been
unable to tackle the public good problem, they have searched for ways to involve non-governmental actors. Efforts
to transfer responsibility for forest environmental services
out of the public sector have relied on a combination of
regulation and market-based approaches (Landell-Mills
and Porras 2002). Experience has shown that well-designed
market-based instruments can achieve environmental goals
at less cost than conventional ‘‘command and control’’
approaches, while creating positive incentives for continual
innovation and improvement (Stavins 2003). Examples of
such instruments in the forestry sector include stumpage
value-based forest revenue systems, financial and material
incentives, long-term forestry concessions, trade liberalization, forest certification and the promotion of markets
for non-timber forest products.

The costs and benefits associated with many human
activities spill over jurisdictional boundaries, thereby
generating externalities that are often reciprocal and
quantitatively significant (Cornes 2008). Therefore, IEPGs
supply depends on either international coordination or
international cooperation. Among payment schemes to
internalize the external benefits of maintaining intact forests, Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation (REDD) is an effort to create a financial value
for the carbon stored in forests, offering incentives for
developing countries to reduce emissions from forested
lands and invest in low-carbon paths to sustainable development. REDD is an example of international coordination
in delivery of ecosystem services. Its integration into
international market-based climate change policies poses a
number of challenges both to institutional design and to
implementation. At present, for example, there are few
effective mechanisms for converting international payments to governments into incentives to on-the-ground
forest communities (Myers 2008; Sikor et al. 2010).
Indeed, creating an effective multilevel system of payments is seen as the core issue in building REDD considering that REDD goes beyond deforestation and forest
degradation, and includes the role of conservation, sustainable management of forest and enhancement of forest
carbon stocks (Anngelsen and Wertz-Kanounnikoff 2008).
It is predicted that financial flows for greenhouse gas
emission reductions from REDD could reach up to US$30
billion a year. This significant North–South flow of funds
could reward a meaningful reduction of carbon emissions
and could also support new, pro-poor development, help
conserve biodiversity, and secure vital ecosystem services.
A second issue is the linkage between distinct ecosystem
services. The REDD scheme targets one important ecosystem service: carbon sequestration. However, it has the
potential to secure other services as well. These services
potentially include both habitat provision for biodiversity
conservation and watershed protection. Reaching international agreement on an instrument to reduce emissions
from deforestation and forest degradation, while recognizing the co-benefits offered by conservation, and the
sustainable management of forested watershed would both
secure global carbon sequestration services, as well as help
to maintain other valuable services provided by forests
(TEEB 2009). There is growing recognition that REDD
planning requires a broadened approach. A future REDD
mechanism should incentivize emissions reduction from
reduced deforestation, enhanced carbon sequestration and
address a number of non-carbon services. Implementation
of REDD also requires attention to the quality of forest
governance, conservation priorities, local rights and tenure
frameworks, and sub-national project potential (Phelps
et al. 2010).

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

123

804

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY
Globalization is often associated with increased privateness—
economic liberalization is associated with the growth of the
number of goods and services allocated through markets,
international market integration, and enhanced private crossborder economic activity such as trade, investment, transport,
travel, migration and communication. However, globalization
is also about increased publicness—about people’s lives
becoming more interdependent. Events in one place of the
globe often have worldwide repercussions. Moreover, a
growing volume of international policy principles, treaties,
norms, laws, and standards is defining common rules for an
ever-wider range of activities (Kaul et al. 2003b).
Public goods are recognized as having benefits that
cannot easily be confined to a single ‘‘buyer’’ (or set of
‘‘buyers’’). Yet once they are provided, many can enjoy
them for free. A clean environment is an example. Without
a mechanism for collective action, these goods will generally be underprovided. In fact, many crises dominating
the international policy agenda today reflect the underprovision of global public goods. With globalization,
externalities are increasingly borne by people in other
countries. Indeed, issues that have traditionally been
merely national are now global because of the greater
interconnectedness of the planet.
Kaul et al. (2003b) suggest a rethinking of three notions
underpinning the theory of public goods. First, properties
of non-rivalry in consumption and non-excludability of
current benefits do not automatically determine whether a
good is public or private. Some goods may be either public
or private. Nevertheless, it is important to distinguish
between a good’s having the potential of being public (that
is, its having non-rival and non-excludable properties) and
its being de facto public (non-exclusive and available for
all to consume). Second, public goods do not necessarily
have to be provided by the state. Many other actors can,
and increasingly do, contribute to their provision. And
third, a growing number of public goods are no longer
national in scope, having assumed cross-border dimensions. Many have become global and require international
cooperation to be adequately provided.
For the most part, the theoretical and empirical literature
in economics has focused on two polar models of public
goods provision: the provision of pure public goods that
benefit all agents, and the provision of local public goods
that only benefit agents in one community (Bloch and
Zenginobuz 2007). We are concerned with cases where the
members of one community enjoy positive spillovers from
the public goods provided by other communities. In the
context of global climate regulation, the REDD scheme
will compensate tropical nations that succeed in reducing

123

carbon emissions from deforestation and forest degradation—source of nearly one fifth of global carbon emissions.
Since forests offer a number of benefits aside from carbon,
however, the scheme could potentially benefits to communities that would otherwise be unable to afford them
(Stickler et al. 2009). If well designed and implemented,
PES schemes such as REDD have the potential to secure
provision of IEPGs that offer benefits at multiple scales,
such as the protection of water supplies, local and regional
climate regulation, and habitat provision for the protection
of biodiversity. The effectiveness of PES schemes depends
heavily on the conditionality of payments (Arriagada and
Perrings 2009), but the principles for their effective design
and implementation are well understood.
To summarize, the implications of this paper for international environmental policy are the following:
1.

2.

Diagnosis of the public goods failure associated with
particular ecosystem services is critical to the development of the appropriate international response.
There are a number of cases where the incentive
structure is such that independent actions by nation
states will be ‘good enough’ to secure the public
interest (Touza and Perrings 2011). Where the technology of supply is ‘best shot’ or where the local
benefits are high enough to lead to a level of supply
that is close to the global optimum, then the independent actions of nation states will be adequate. However, where local benefits lead to a level of local
supply that leaves global demand unsatisfied, then
international coordination or cooperation in the delivery of ecosystem services will be required. We note
that this largely depends on the nature and strength of
off-site effects. Local actions that generate significant
off-site benefits or costs are most likely to require
international coordination or cooperation. Off-site
effects can reflect both natural (through hydrological
or atmospheric flows) and social (through trade and
travel) transmission. Since social transmission of
effects is rapidly evolving, understanding social transmission pathways is important to the diagnosis of the
public goods failure.
There are two categories of IEPGs that are most likely
to be undersupplied. The first involves an additive
supply technology, a high opportunity cost of supply
and transmission to a large number of other countries
through the general circulation system. Examples
include mitigation of climate change, and management
of transboundary nutrient flows, currently addressed
through the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Convention on Long Range Transboundary Air Pollution. The second involves a weakest
link supply technology, and transmission to a large

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

3.

4.

805

number of other countries through global trade,
transport and travel. Examples include the management of infectious zoonotic diseases and the control of
invasive pest species, currently addressed through the
International Health Regulations, the Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Agreement, and the Convention on
Biological Diversity.
If there is a public good failure that demands international
coordination or cooperation, it is then important to
determine the degree to which the collective response
should be targeted. In principle, action should be targeted
to reflect the weight attaching to the supply from any one
country. So, at one extreme, international contributions to
an IEPG with an additive supply technology that is
unweighted (a simple sum), such as carbon sequestration
by forest plantations, should not be targeted at all.
Whereas international contributions to a weakest link
international environmental public good, such as infectious disease control, should be targeted at the weakest
link. In practice, most ecosystem services are jointly
produced (come as a bundle), and involve an intermediate
position. Particular countries are more important for the
provision of some services than others (e.g., high
biodiversity countries contribute more to the global gene
pool than others) so most international contributions to
IEPGs should be targeted in some measure.
For IEPGs that are supplied in specific countries,
support may take the form of direct investment in
supply (the Global Environment Facility model) or of
payments for the benefits of supply (the Payments for
Ecosystem Services model). The fact that GEF is
under-resourced, and is only weakly targeted, suggests
that the second option may become the dominant
mechanism for assuring local provision of IEPGs. We
have elsewhere discussed the conditions that need to
be satisfied for PES schemes to be effective (Arriagada
and Perrings 2009). The most important of these is that
payments for ecosystem services should be conditional
on the supply of those services. Where PES schemes
have both income transfer/poverty alleviation and
public good supply objectives, conditionality may be
lost altogether. It is important that the design of PES
schemes fit the diagnosis of the public good problem,
and the technology of public good supply.

Acknowledgment The authors acknowledge support from the
United Nations Environment Programme.

REFERENCES
Anand, P. 2004. Financing the provision of public goods. The World
Economy 27: 215–237.

Anngelsen, A., and S. Wertz-Kanounnikoff. 2008. What are the key
design issues for REDD and the criteria for assessing options? In
Moving ahead with REDD,, ed. A. Angelse. Bogor: SUBUR
Printing.
Arriagada, R., and C. Perrings. 2009. Making payments for ecosystem
services work. Ecosystem services economics working papers.
United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi.
Barrett, S. 2007. Why cooperate? The incentive to supply global
public goods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Batina, R., and T. Ihori. 2005. Public goods: Theories and evidence.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Bloch, F., and U. Zenginobuz. 2007. The effect of spillovers on the
provision of local public goods. Review of Economic Design 11:
199–216.
Cornes, R. 2008. Global public goods and commons: theoretical
challenges for a changing world. International Tax and Public
Finance 15: 353–359.
Cornes, R., and T. Sandler. 1996. The theory of externalities, public
goods, and club goods. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Dombrowsky, I. 2007. Conflict, cooperation and institutions in
international water management: An economic analysis. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Engel, S., S. Pagiola, and S. Wunder. 2008. Designing payments for
environmental services in theory and practice: An overview of
the issues. Ecological Economics 65: 663–674.
Ferraro, P., and A. Kiss. 2007. Direct payments to conserve
biodiversity. Science 298: 1718–1719.
Ferraro, P., and R. Simpson. 2002. The cost-effectiveness of
conservation payments. Land Economics 78: 339–353.
Ferroni, M., and A. Mody. 2002. Global incentives for international
public goods: Introduction and overview. In International goods
public: Incentives, measurement, and financing,, ed. M. Ferroni,
and A. Mody. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Goldstein, J., G. Daily, J. Friday, P. Matson, and R. Naylor. 2006.
Business strategies for conservation on private lands: Koa
forestry as a case study. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 103: 10140–10145.
Hirshleifer, J. 1983. From weakest-link to best shot: The voluntary
provision of public goods. Public Choice 41: 371–386.
Holzinger, K. 2001. Aggregation technology of common goods and
its strategic consequences: Global warming, biodiversity, and
sitting conflicts. European Journal of Political Research 40:
117–138.
Kanbur, R. 2003. IFI’s and IPG’s: operational implications for the
World Bank. In Challenges to the World Bank, IMF: Developing
country perspectives,, ed. A. Buira. London: Anthem Press.
Kanbur, R. 2004. Cross-border externalities, international public
goods and their implications for aid agencies. In Global tensions:
Challenges, opportunities in the World economy,, ed. L. Beneria,
and S. Bisnath. New York: Routledge.
Kaul, I., I. Grunberg, and M. Stern, ed. 1999. Defining global public
goods. In Global public goods: International cooperation in the
21st century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kaul, I., P. Conceição, K. Le Goulven, and R. Mendoza, ed. 2003a.
How to improve the provision of global public goods. In
Providing global public goods: Managing globalization. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kaul, I., P. Conceição, K. Le Goulven, and R. Mendoza, ed. 2003b.
Why do global public goods matter today? In Providing global
public goods: Managing globalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kumar, P. 2010. The economics of ecosystems and biodiversity.
London: Earthscan.
Landell-Mills, N., and I. Porras. 2002. Silver bullet or fool’s gold? A
global review of markets for forest environmental services and

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

123

806

AMBIO (2011) 40:798–806

their impact on the poor. London: International Institute for
Environment and Development.
Madsen, B., N. Carroll, and K. Moore. 2010. Offset and compensation
programs worldwide. Washington: Ecosystem Marketplace.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and human
well-being: General synthesis. Washington: Island Press.
Morrissey, O., D. Te Velde, and A. Hewitt. 2002. Defining
international public goods: conceptual issues. In International
public goods: Incentives, measurement, financing, ed. M. Ferroni,
and A. Mody. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Myers, M. 2008. Policies to reduce emissions from deforestation and
degradation (REDD) in developing countries. An examination of
the issues facing the incorporation of REDD into market-based
climate policies. Resources for the future. Discussion paper RFF
DP 07-50, Washington, DC, USA.
Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the commons: The evolution of
institutions for collective action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pagiola, S. 2008. Payments for environmental services in Costa Rica.
Ecological Economics 65: 712–724.
Pearce, D. 2003. The social cost of carbon and its policy implications.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 19: 362–384.
Pearce, D. 2005. Paradoxes in biodiversity conservation. World
Economics 6: 57–69.
Perrings, C., and M. Gadgil. 2003. Conserving biodiversity: Reconciling local and global public benefits. In Providing global public
goods: Managing globalization, ed. I. Kaul, P. Conceição, K. Le
Goulven, and R. Mendoza. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perrings, C., M. Williamson, E. Barbier, D. Delfino, S. Dalmazzone,
J. Shogren, P. Simmons, and A. Watkinson. 2002. Biological
invasion risks and the public good: an economic perspective.
Conservation Ecology 6: 1.
Phelps, J., M. Guerrero, D. Dalabajan, B. Young, and E. Webb. 2010.
What makes a REDD country? Global Environmental Change
20: 322–332.
Samuelson, P. 1954. The pure theory of public expenditure. The
Review of Economics and Statistics 36: 387–389.
Sandler, T. 2004. Global collective action. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sikor, T., J. Stahl, T. Enters, J.C. Ribot, N. Singh, W.D. Sunderlin,
and L. Wollenberg. 2010. REDD-plus, forest people’s rights and
nested climate governance. Global Environmental Change 20:
423–425.
Stavins, R. 2003. Experience with market-based environmental policy
instruments. In Handbook of environmental economics, ed.
M. Karl-Goran, and R.V. Jeffrey. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Stickler, C., D. Nepstad, M. Coe, D. Mcgrath, H. Rodriguez, W.
Walker, B. Soares-Filho, and E. Davidson. 2009. The potential
ecological costs and co-benefits of REDD: A critical review and
case study from the Amazon region. Global Change Biology 15:
2803–2824.

123

TEEB. 2009. TEEB climate issues update. Nairobi: United Nations
Environment Program.
Touza, J., and C. Perrings. 2011. Strategic behavior and the scope for
unilateral provision of transboundary ecosystem services that are
international environmental public goods. Strategic Behavior
and the Environment 1: 89–117.
United Nations Development Programme. 2002. Profiling the provision status of global public goods. New York: UNDP Office of
Development Studies.
Wunder, S. 2007. The efficiency of payments for environmental
services in tropical conservation. Conservation Biology 21:
48–58.
Wunder, S., S. Engel, and S. Pagiola. 2008. Taking stock: a
comparative analysis of payments for environmental services
programs in developed and developing countries. Ecological
Economics 65: 834–852.

AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Rodrigo Arriagada (&) is a Assistant Professor in the Department
of Agricultural Economics at the Pontificia Universidad Catolica de
Chile. Dr. Arriagada is also an associated research fellow for Environment for Development (EfD) initiative in Central America and
ecoSERVICES Group at Arizona State University. His fields of
specialization are environmental economics, program evaluation
econometrics, applied microeconomics and development economics.
Dr. Arriagada’s current research interests focus on environmental
economics and policy, the use of experimental and quasi-experimental program evaluation methods on conservation interventions,
deforestation and land use, issues at the intersection of economic
development and environmental protection.
Address: Department of Agricultural Economics, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Avenida Vicuña Mackenna 4860 Macul,
Santiago, Chile.
e-mail: rarriagadac@uc.cl
Charles Perrings is a Professor of Environmental Economics at
Arizona State University (ASU). Previous appointments include
Professor of Environmental Economics and Environmental Management at the University of York; Professor of Economics at the University of California, Riverside; and Director of the Biodiversity
Program of the Beijer Institute, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences,
Stockholm, where he is a Fellow. At ASU, he directs (with Ann
Kinzig) the ecoSERVICES Group within the College of Liberal Arts
and Sciences. The Group studies the causes and consequences of
change in ecosystem services—the benefits that people derive from
the biophysical environment. It analyses biodiversity change in terms
of its impacts on the things that people care about.
Address: ecoSERVICES Group, School of Life Sciences, Arizona
State University, Box 874501, Tempe, AZ 85287-4501, USA.
e-mail: Charles.perrings@asu.edu

 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 2011
www.kva.se/en

