2. Population dynamics and fishing
This chapter shows the basic features of fish stock dynamics and how the stock is
affected by fishing. The sustainable yield curve, yield as a function of fishing effort, is
derived. This curve is an important bridge between the work of biologists and
economists, and it will be used extensively throughout these materials.

2.1 Growth of fish stocks
A fish species that lives and is able to reproduce itself within a given geographical
area is called a stock or a population. In fisheries science and management literature,
the term “stock” is most common, whereas in the ecology literature “population” is
generally preferred. Some authors use stock as a synonym for an exploited population,
but in this text the term stock will be used for any population, whether exploited or
not. Ecologically speaking a population is “a group with unimpeded gene flow”. An
example of the relationship between species and stocks is the North Atlantic species
cod (Gadus morhua) which consists of several stocks, including the CanadianNewfoundlandic, the Icelandic and the Arcto-Norwegian cod. In principle, stocks are
self-contained entities, even though there might be some migrational exchange
between them. Each stock has its own particular characteristics that may be genetic, a
result of differing environments, or usually a mixture of both. 1

Fish stock change depends on recruitment, natural mortality, individual growth
and harvesting. This may be summarised as follows:

Stock change = Recruitment + Individual growth - Natural mortality - Harvest
= Natural growth - Harvest
Note that the stock change can be positive or negative if recruitment and individual
growth together is greater or smaller, respectively, than natural mortality and harvest.
Empirical research and theoretical reasoning have concluded that natural growth of
fish stocks may be illustrated as bell-shaped growth curves as shown in figure 2.1.
Growth curves could also be called yield curves since the natural growth of fish
1

Pitcher and Hart (1992) give a thorough review of fisheries biology and fisheries biological models as
well as a review of fish stocks globally. Hamre (1986) and Pedersen (2002) give reviews of fish stocks
in the North Sea and Norwegian waters.

13

stocks might be harvested. For most fish species, lower stock levels mean relative
higher recruitment and individual growth, whereas higher stock levels imply relative
lower recruitment, lower individual growth and/or higher natural mortality due to
density-dependent biological processes. Thus, the sum of growth-augmenting and
growth-impeding factors is a bell-shaped growth curve with the highest growth at an
intermediate stock level. The maximum natural growth is at stock level X MSY in figure
2.1. If the natural growth of the stock is harvested, the maximum harvest is achieved
for stock level X MSY and this harvest is called the maximum sustainable yield (MSY).
MSY could be, for example, 200 000 tonnes per year for a cod stock. In each case
shown in figure 2.1 a stable equilibrium of the unharvested stock exists at level K, and
this level is usually called the environmental carrying capacity of the stock.

Figure 2.1. Growth curves with (a) compensation, (b) depensation, and (c) critical
depensation.

For growth curve (a) in figure 2.1 the relative natural rate of growth F(X)/X
increases when the stock level decreases, and we call this effect pure compensation.
At low stock levels, some stocks have relative growth rates that decrease with reduced
stock level. The growth of such stocks is said to be depensatory, and two growth
curves with depensation are shown in panels (b) and (c) in figure 2.1. Growth curve (c)
has a critical stock level K 0 which implies extinction if the stock should be depleted
below this level for any reason. Depensation may be observed for some prey stocks,
for example, herring, but not exclusively prey stocks. This feature may be the effect of
a predator, for instance, seals, that continue to consume its prey even when the prey
stock declines. Thus, in such a case the prey stock will demonstrate depensatoric

14

growth. In case the predator is in strong need and has the ability to locate and
consume the last school of prey, the prey stock is vulnerable to critical depensation
and extinction if fished too hard.

For a thorough discussion of bioeconomic fishery models we shall need some
simple mathematical tools. The following symbols will be used, where t indicates
point in time:

X (t ) = Stock level (weight of the stock, for example in thousand tonnes)

X (t ) = dX(t)/dt = Change in stock per unit of time
F ( X ) = Natural growth function.

Unless necessary for the understanding, the symbol for time, t, will be omitted in the
text and equations.

For the natural growth function dX/dt = F(X) the following characteristics are
valid:

(2.1)

F'(X ) =

dF ( X ) >
< 0
dX

for

X

<
>

X MSY .

A closer look at figure 2.1 reveals that the growth curves in panels (a) and (b) fulfil
the requirements of growth function (2.1). However, this is not the case for very low
stock levels in panel (c). Natural growth, expressed as in figure 2.1 and equation (2.1),
is the limit to fishers’ harvest. To produce a harvest, fishers need man-made tools and
fishing effort, in addition to nature’s tool, the fish stock. Without both, there will be
no harvest.

Note that the growth curve in Figure 2.1 panel (a) is based on the natural
growth function F ( X ) = rX (1 − X / K ) which we shall return to several times. In this
function K is the carrying capacity of the habitat of this fish stock. Thus K is the
maximum stock level, to be observed only before harvesting takes place. Further, r is
the maximum growth rate, F(X)/X, to be observed only when X is close to zero.

15

Box 2.1 The Zarephath widow’s pot
The importance of the supply of natural resources for people’s survival and welfare
have been described and discussed in both the secular and religious literature down
the ages. The Bible, for example, mentions in several places water resources and their
significance for people living in the area that today is called the Middle East. Issues
related to the production of food from land and sea are also common themes in the
Bible. The story of the Zarephath widow’s pot is a case of renewable resource use. In
fact, it was not just one pot in this story, but two – a jar and a cruse.
In 1Kings 17, the Bible tells how the prophet Elijah had been living from water of the
stream Cherith, east of Jordan, and of bread and meat that the ravens brought him in
the mornings and evenings. However, after a while the stream dried up because of
lack of rain. Then God told Elijah to go to the town of Zarephath to stay with a poor
and hungry widow. He came upon her at the gate of the city and she willingly shared
her very last resources with him, using her final meal and oil to make a cake to be
shared between Elijah, her son and herself.
And Eli'jah said to her, “Fear not; go and do as you have said; but first make me a
little cake of it and bring it to me, and afterward make for yourself and your son. For
thus says the LORD the God of Israel, 'The jar of meal shall not be spent, and the
cruse of oil shall not fail, until the day that the LORD sends rain upon the earth.'"
And she went and did as Eli'jah said; and she, and he, and her household ate for
many days. The jar of meal was not spent, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according
to the word of the LORD which he spoke by Eli'jah.
1 Kings17, 13-16.
As the pots of the widow sustained her use of meal and oil, so the fish in the sea might
sustain mankind’s harvest. As long as harvesters use the resource within its
production possibilities, the fish stock will give a lasting yield. However, it might go
wrong if too many take too much from the same pot. A necessary, but not sufficient
condition to avoid over-fishing is ecological and economic knowledge – that is to say,
knowledge about interactions between man and nature.
Epilogue. Supply and sharing of resources are hardly as easy as in this story. Could it
be that future “water wars” would be much harder, with more severe consequences for
the people involved than some of the fish wars we have seen in recent decades? The
Middle East area of Elijah and the widow in this story might be a candidate area for
such wars. However, with co-operation and proper management conflicts may be
avoided or reduced, for water as well as for fish resources.

16

2.2 Effort and production
A fish harvesting firm or a fisher uses several inputs, or factors, to catch fish and to
land it round, gutted or processed. Inputs used include fuel, bait, gear and labour. In
this respect a harvesting firm is not much different from any other firm – a set of
inputs is used to produce an output. However, the direct contribution from the natural
resource, the fish stock, constitutes a significant difference compared with a
manufacturing firm that can use as much as it wants of all the required inputs. A fisher
can vary the amount of inputs, but not the size of the stock.

In actual fishing we usually find that for a given set of inputs the amount of
output for the fishing firm varies with the stock level and the availability of the fish.
Fish migration for spawning and feeding makes most stocks in certain areas more
available for the fishers at some times of the year than in others. Such seasonal
variations in the distribution of fish stocks and year classes are the basis for many
seasonal fisheries around the world. However, to start with, we shall simplify the
analysis by disregarding seasonal variations and assume that the fish stock is
homogeneously distributed across area and time. The focus is on the size of the stock
and the importance of this for the catch.

For analytical and practical purposes it is useful to let fishers encounter the
stock with what is called fishing effort, or just effort. Examples of effort are hours of
trawling, number of gillnets and number of long-line hooks. Effort is produced by
optimal use of inputs and is expressed in the production function

(2.2)

E = Ψ ( v1 ,..., vn ) ,

where E is effort and v i is factor i. In one way, this is a regular production function
recognisable from the theory of the firm. However, the great difference is that E is not
a final product to be sold, like the products of most firms, but an intermediate good
produced to encounter the fish stock.

17

Catch, the product of fish harvesting firms, is a function of effort and stock
and this can be expressed in the harvest function

(2.3)

H = f (E, X ) .

Harvest function (2.3) is a short-run production function in the sense that it is valid for
a given stock level at any point in time, without any feedback from effort to stock.
Figure 2.2 gives an example of how catch varies with effort for two stock levels; H:
high and L: low. Note that the catch is non-increasing in effort – that is, more effort
implies higher catch, but not necessarily proportional to the increase in effort.

Figure 2.2. Short-run variations in harvest as a function of effort.

If effort is measured, for example, in trawl hours, catch could be measured in
kg or tonnes. Effort and catch should both be related to the same unit of time, which
could be a day or a week.

Thus, there is a dichotomy in the analysis of fish production that is not found
in the traditional theory of the firm. This way of analysing fisheries has the advantage
that it treats the inputs controlled by the firm, such as fuel, bait and gear, differently
from the major input, fish stocks. The latter is a necessary factor of production
affected by the actions of numerous fishers (see the next section), but not controlled
by any of them.

18

2.3 Yield and stock effects of fishing
Fish stock levels are affected by fishing if the total effort is sufficiently high over
some period of time. How much depends on the growth potential of the stock and the
total harvest. Change in the stock is expressed by the growth equation

(2.4)

X = F ( X ) − H .

From this equation follows

(2.5)

X

>
<

0

if

H

<
>

(X) .

To ensure positive growth of the stock, the harvest must be lower than the natural
growth. Biological equilibrium is by definition achieved when X = 0 , and in this case
equations (2.3) and (2.4) give

(2.6)

f ( E , X ) = F ( X ).

Since this is one equation with two variables, X and E, the stock is implicitly given as
a function of effort E. This means that at equilibrium the stock level is a function of
effort, and from equation (2.3) it now follows that the equilibrium harvest is also a
function of effort. This equilibrium harvest is often called sustainable yield since it
can be sustained by the stock for a given level of effort.

We have seen that, knowing the growth function F(X) and the short-run
harvest function (2.3), the sustainable yield may be derived from equation (2.6). This
can also be done graphically as shown in figure 2.3. To simplify the analysis we now
assume that the short-run harvest function is linear in effort and stock level:

(2.7)

H = qEX .

Equation (2.7) is called the Schaefer harvest function (Schaefer, 1957). The parameter
q is a constant called the availability parameter. This parameter expresses how
effective the effort is in relation to the stock level. If effort is measured in, for

19

example, gill net days, q expresses the ratio between catch per gill net day, H/E, and
stock level, X. Thus, the value of q is directly linked to the scaling of E. In some
fisheries the combined harvest technology and fish behaviour is such that catch per
unit of effort, H/E, is nearly independent of the stock size (see Bjørndal, 1987). In
other fisheries catch per unit effort increases with the stock level, but not
proportionally as in the Schaefer function (see Eide et al., 2003).

Panel (a) of figure 2.3 shows short-run harvest as straight lines for five
different effort levels. For the smallest effort E 1 the harvest curve crosses the growth
curve for stock level X 1 and harvest H 1 . Thus, a small effort – over a sufficiently long
time to let the stock reach equilibrium – gives a high stock level and a relatively small
catch. A somewhat higher effort level E 2 gives a lower stock level X 2 but a higher
sustainable catch, H 2 . However, an even higher effort like E 4 gives stock level X 4 that
is significantly lower than X 2 , even though the sustainable catch H 4 is equal to H 2 .
Similarly, E 5 gives a catch H 5 equal to E 1 , even though the stock level X 5 is much
smaller than X 1 . In Figure 2.3 the highest possible harvest is reached for effort level
E 3 and this harvest is called the maximum sustainable yield (MSY).

Figure 2.3. The sustainable yield curve shows harvest as a function of effort and is
derived from the natural growth curve and the harvest curve.
The natural-growth stock-level curve in panel (a) has been transformed into a
sustainable-harvest effort curve in panel (b). The H(E) curve is also called the
sustainable yield curve and it connects the long-run harvest potential to fishing effort.
This harvest-effort curve has the same form as the growth curve in this case since the

20

Schaefer short-run harvest function is linear in both effort and stock. It is important to
note the difference between the short-run harvest function H = f (E,X) in (2.3),
depicted as straight lines in panel (a) of figure 2.3, and the sustainable yield curve
H(E), in panel (b). The former is valid for any combination of effort, E, and stock, X,
at any time, whereas the latter is the long-run equilibrium harvest for given levels of
effort. The sustainable yield curve is conditional on equilibrium harvest.

The main purpose of figure 2.3 is to derive the equilibrium harvest-effort
curve shown in panel (b). Let us now use this to discuss what happens over time if
fishing takes place outside equilibrium. Suppose fishers use effort E 1 to harvest a
virgin stock at the carrying capacity level K. To start with, the harvest will be
significantly greater than H 1 since the stock level K is bigger than X 1 , and this implies
that the stock level will decrease. When the stock decreases, the harvest will also
decrease until it reaches such a level that, according to the short-run harvest curve
designated qE 1 X in panel (a) of figure 2.3, harvest equals the natural growth of the
stock. The decrease in harvest will continue until stock level X 1 has been reached. At
this point in time, harvest equals natural growth, and another equilibrium has been
established. On the other hand, if fishers use effort E 1 to fish at a stock level lower
than X 1 the stock will grow since natural growth is greater than harvest. The length of
the transition period between, for example, the virgin stock level K and level X 1
depends on the biological production potential of the stock. Growth curves and
sustainable yield curves, as shown in figure 2.3, may be used to compare different
equilibria but cannot be used to tell how long a time the transition from one
equilibrium to another will take.

So far in this chapter we have analysed the effects of fishing on a stock with growth
compensation (see figure 2.1). However, if the growth process exhibits depensation or
critical depensation, the sustainable yield curve proves to become very different from
the case of compensation. This is demonstrated in figures 2.4 and 2.5. The former is
for the case of depensation and the latter is for the case of critical depensation of
growth. In figure 2.4 panel (a), E D is the effort that makes the Schaefer harvest curve
tangent to the growth curve at the zero stock level. Mathematically, E D can be found
from equation

21

Figure 2.4. The natural growth curve and sustainable yield as a function of effort in
the case of depensation.

Figure 2.5. The natural growth curve and sustainable yield as a function of effort in
the case of critical depensation.

(2.8)

qE D = lim F ' ( X ) .
X →0

The left-hand side (lhs) of this equation is the slope of the Schaefer harvest curve, and
the right hand side (rhs) is the slope of the growth curve.

To ensure a sustainable harvest there is an upper limit on effort which cannot
be exceeded, and this effort level is designated E MAX in figures 2.4 and 2.5. If effort

22

levels above E MAX are maintained for a sufficiently long time the stock will be
biologically over-fished and finally will become extinct. In case of extinction, panel
(b) of figures 2.4 and 2.5 shows that the yield is zero for effort higher than E MAX .
Figure 2.4 panel (b) shows that the harvest curve is double, with an upper and
a lower branch for each value of effort between E D and E MAX . This is due to the
existence of two intersection points between each of the linear harvest curves and the
growth curve, as shown in panel (a). There is, however, a significant difference
between the two branches of the yield curve. The upper part constitutes stable points
of harvesting whereas the lower part constitutes unstable harvesting. An example will
explain the stability problem. The harvest curve for effort E 1 intersects with the
growth curve for two stock levels, the low one X 1L and the high one X 1H in panel (a)
of figure 2.4. For stock levels lower than X 1L the harvest curve is above the growth
curve and the natural growth is too small to compensate for the harvest. This implies
that the stock will decrease from X 1L to zero if effort E 1 is maintained over a
sufficiently long period of time, indicated in panel (a) by an arrow pointing to the left.
Thus, X 1L is an unstable equilibrium for the stock harvested by effort E 1 . This would
also be the case for all other left-hand side intersections between the harvest curve and
the growth curve for effort levels between E D and E MAX . On the other hand, if the
stock level is just above X 1L natural growth is larger than harvest for effort E 1 and the
stock will increase. An arrow pointing to the right indicates this. Therefore, in this
case the stock will in the long run increase towards X 1H , which is a stable equilibrium.
The lower part of the yield curve in figure 2.4 panel (b) is dashed to mark that this
part represents unstable harvest. Figure 2.5 shows that, in case of growth with critical
depensation, the harvest curve is double for all levels of E between zero and E MAX .
The lower part of the yield curve also represents unstable harvest in this case.

Exercise 2.1
Assume that the harvest function is H(E,X)=qEX, where q is the catchability
coefficient and E is fishing effort. The catchability coefficient for a particular fishery
is q=0.00067, and the stock level is X=3.0 million tonnes.

a)

What is the catch per unit of effort (CPUE) in this case?

23

b)

What could the unit of measurement of effort be if the fish stock is for example
cod or hake?

Exercise 2.2
X

Assume that the function F ( X ) = rX 1 −  describes the annual natural growth of a
K


fish stock. X represents the stock biomass at the start of the year. K is the
environmental carrying capacity in stock biomass terms and r is the intrinsic growth
rate.
a)

Show that the maximum sustainable yield (MSY) can be expressed by the two
parameters r and K, so that MSY =

b)

rK
.
4

Draw a picture of F(X) for r=0.4 and K=8.0 million tonnes.

Assume that the harvest function is H(E,X)=qEX, where q is the catchability
coefficient and E is fishing effort measured in number of vessel year.

c)

Show how the sustainable yield curve (the long-run catch function) H(E) can be
found. Tip: find it graphically like in figure 2.3, or by use of H(E,X)=F(X)
where you eliminate X by using the harvest function.

d)

Add to your picture of F(X) the harvest function H(E,X)=qEX for q=0.00067
and E equal to 100, 200, 400 and 500 vessel year. What is the sustainable yield
for these levels of effort?

24

5. The Gordon-Schaefer model
This chapter discusses the Gordon-Schaefer model for analysis of open-access and
optimally managed fisheries. The main differences between this and the previous
chapters are derived from the use here of a specific form of the natural growth
function. This allows us to find exact expressions for equilibrium levels of the fish
stock, effort, revenues, costs and resource rent.

5.1 The logistic growth model
Most fish stocks are such that natural growth is small for both high and low stock
levels and largest for some intermediate level. The reasons for this are mainly densitydependent biological factors, such as individual growth and natural mortality. In the
previous chapters we have used a bell-shaped graph for natural growth as a function
of stock size. Now we are going to use the logistic growth function, which is a
mathematical representation of biomass growth of an animal stock, and this depicts a
symmetric bell-shaped natural growth curve.

Stock change per unit of time is

(5.1)

dX
= F(X ) − H,
dt

where F(X) is natural growth and H is catch. The Gordon-Schaefer model, named
after the works of two Canadian researchers (economist H. Scott Gordon (1954) and
biologist M. B. Schaefer (1957)), is based on the logistic type natural growth equation

(5.2)

F ( X ) = rX (1 − X / K )

Equation (5.2) was designed and discussed first by P. F. Verhulst (1838), and later rediscovered by R. Pearl (1925). Parameter r is the maximum relative growth rate, also
called the intrinsic growth rate, and K is the carrying capacity, both parameters
assumed to be fixed. The reader should verify that the relative natural growth is a
linear function of the stock level and approaches its maximum, equal to r, when the

72

stock level goes to zero, that is F(X)/X approaches r when X approaches zero.
Parameter r is mainly related to the actual species we are studying while K depends
on mainly the natural environment of the stock, such as size and biological
productivity of the habitat. Equation (5.2) is quadratic in X and for low stock levels
the first part with the positive sign is dominating, whereas for higher levels the second
part, with the negative sign, is dominating. Natural growth is usually positive, but
may even be negative if the stock level for any reason is higher than K. However,
negative natural growth can for obvious reasons not represent biological equilibrium,
with dX/dt = 0 in (5.1), neither with nor without harvesting.

Natural growth has its maximum for a specific stock level that may be found
by maximising F(X) with respect to X. This stock level produces the maximum
sustainable yield (MSY), and the student should verify that this equals

(5.3)

X MSY = K / 2.

Substituting X MSY for X in equation (5.2) gives
(5.4)

MSY = F ( X MSY ) = rK / 4.

Thus the maximum sustainable yield equals a quarter of the product of the two
parameters.

The Gordon-Schaefer model includes natural growth, according to the law of
equation (5.2), and harvest according to

(5.5)

H = qEX

that we recall from chapter 2. This harvest function has the property of having catch
per unit of effort proportional to the stock level, with the catchability parameter q as
the proportional ratio. In Schaefer (1957) catch and effort data were used to estimate
changes in fish stocks.

73

We are now going to find the connection between harvest and effort at
equilibrium for this model. Equilibrium harvesting means dX/dt ≡ 0 and H ≡ F(X) in
equation (5.1), and from (5.5) follows X = H/qE. Substituting this expression for X in
(5.1) gives

(5.6)

H=

rH
qE


H 
1 −
.
qKE 


Rearranging equation (5.6) somewhat gives

(5.7)

 qE 
H = H ( E ) = qKE 1 −
,
r 


when H ≡ F ( X ).

Comparing (5.7) and (5.2), we notice also that the former, the equilibrium harvest
function, is a quadratic function. It is quadratic in the product qE, whereas the natural
growth function (5.2) is quadratic in X. You may notice that the product qE has to be
less than r to have a positive harvest, according to equation (5.7). If qE is kept at or
above r the stock becomes extinct and this of course gives a zero equilibrium harvest.
We are now going to use the equilibrium harvest function for an economic analysis of
open access and optimally managed fisheries.

5.2 The open-access fishery
Let us now see if we can find the open-access effort and stock equilibrium levels
expressed as functions of biological and economic parameters. This way we may
analyse the equilibrium levels are affected by changes in parameter values.

When harvest is sold in a competitive market with several close substitutes,
the quay price of fish, p, is hardly dependent on the quantity landed. Let us assume
that p is constant. Price multiplied by quantity in (5.7) gives the total revenue

74

(5.8)

qE 

TR( E ) = pH = pqKE 1 −
.
r 


The TR(E) curve and the H(E) curve are shown in Figure 5.1 panel (a) for p > 1. In
this case the TR curve is above the H curve, but generally the graphical picture
depends on the units of measurement for total revenue and harvest.

Figure 5.1. The sustainable harvest and revenue curves, as well as total cost, are
shown in Panel (a), and the marginal and average revenue and cost curves
of the Gordon-Schaefer model are shown in Panel (b).
Total harvest costs increase with effort, and the simplest form is when the increase is
proportional. With a constant unit cost of effort, a, total cost equals

(5.9)

TC ( E ) = aE.

75

The total cost is shown as a straight line in Figure 5.1 panel (a). In this case MC(E) =
AC(E) = a, and this is shown in panel (b). We may use equation (5.8) to find the
average and marginal revenue of effort. The average revenue equals

(5.10)

qE 

AR ( E ) = TR( E ) / E = pqK 1 −
.
r 


The average revenue curve is a straight, downward sloping line as shown in Figure
5.1 panel (b). Its maximum is for E close to zero. In this case the equilibrium stock
level will be close to its carrying capacity, implying the highest AR(E). The average
revenue approaches zero when effort E approaches r/q. If the fishing effort is kept
sufficiently large, E > r/q, for a long time the stock becomes extinct. This is why
AR(E) = 0 for such high effort levels.

Let us now find the open-access effort level for the Gordon-Schaefer model.
We have seen in Ch. 3, equation (3.6) that at bioeconomic equilibrium under openaccess MC(E) = AR(E). With total cost given in (5.9) the open-access equilibrium
level of effort can be found from AR(E) = a combined with (5.10). This gives

(5.11)

E∞ =

r
a 
1 −
.
q
pqK 

Thus the open-access equilibrium level of fishing effort depends on both biological
and economic parameters. It is proportional with the intrinsic growth rate r, increases
with fish price and carrying capacity, and decreases with effort cost. In other words,
fisheries based on biologically highly productive resources with large r and K, may
sustain a large fishing effort under open-access. In addition, this may be spurred on by
high fish price and low effort cost. Having found the open-access effort level in (5.11)
the corresponding equilibrium harvest may be found by substituting E ∞ for E in
equation (5.7).

After discussing the open-access fishing effort, let us now find the open-access
equilibrium level of the fish stock. For this we will use the unit cost of harvesting and

76

