lOMoARcPSD|18763363

Chapter 3

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries
Dale Squires

Introduction

Property Rights

Rights-based management is increasingly used to
manage ﬁsheries throughout the world. Rights
were, until recently, used almost exclusively to
manage ﬁsheries within the 200-mile exclusive
economic zones (EEZs) of nations. Conservation
and management of transnational ﬁsheries for tunas and other highly migratory species is turning
to rights-based management as well, but, given
the transnational nature of these ﬁsheries, the
sovereignty of nations, and the state of international law, the development of property and use
rights in these ﬁsheries is proceeding along a different path and within the context of international
treaties and customary law.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a
general background to property and use rights
for the conservation and management of transnational ﬁsheries for tunas and other highly migratory species. Such a background facilitates the
discussion and analysis of rights-based management and the emergence of property rights for
the conservation and management of transnational
ﬁsheries for highly migratory species, particularly
tunas.

From a legal perspective, property is a bundle of
rights over resources that the owner is free to exercise and that is protected from interference by
others (Cooter and Ulen 2004). Property rights
are also political institutions that deﬁne or delimit the range of privileges granted to individuals or groups to speciﬁc assets (Libecap 1989).
Property rights, as political institutions, allocate
decision-making authority, and thereby determine
the economic player in a system and deﬁne the
distribution of wealth and income, and, more generally, costs and beneﬁts, in a society (Johnson and
Libecap 1982, Libecap 1989). Property right institutions range from formal arrangements, such as
constitutional provisions, statutes, and judicial rulings, to informal conventions and customs pertaining to the allocation and use of property (Libecap
1989). These rights are not immutable, in that they
may change from one generation to another.
The major source of externalities, and thereby
economically inefﬁcient resource use, can be
traced to various impediments that prevent the
establishment of property rights (Baumol and
Oates 1988). Property rights facilitate the socially

39

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

40

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

efﬁcient exploitation of resources, enabling the
owner to exclude others from the resource and
thereby internalize the externalities that would occur if access were free (De Meza and Gould 1992).
The ability to exclude also provides incentives to
invest in improving the quality of the resource and
exploit it at a socially optimum rate. Coase (1960)
emphasized the importance of economic costs and
discussed the distribution of property rights.
The nature in which property rights are deﬁned
and enforced affects an economy’s performance
in at least two ways (Libecap 1989). First, because property rights institutions assign ownership to assets and designate the beneﬁts and costs
of resource-use decisions, these institutions structure incentives for economic behavior within the
society. Second, because these institutions allocate
decision-making authority, the prevailing property
rights arrangement determines the composition of
the players in the economic system.
Alternative bundles of rights, as deﬁned by the
strengths of different characteristics of the rights,
create incentives to use resources in ways with
varying degrees of economic efﬁciency and conservation. Critically, rights have the potential to
align the incentives that individuals face with the
goals of society.

Types of Property Rights
Property rights come in many different forms and
can be classiﬁed by the extent to which the holder
of the right has exclusive use.
At one extreme is open access (res nullis) or
the absence of rights in that no entity has exclusive use of the resource (Warming 1911, Gordon
1954).1 There is the right to access the ﬁshery
along with others. The high seas are open access,
because access is free to all, and no user has the
legal right under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (LOS) and the Agreement
for the Implementation of the Provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks (UNIA) to keep another user out. Un-

der open access, no individual resource user has an
economic incentive to conserve the resource and
none can conserve the resource by delaying use,
since that only makes more of the resource available to other users. This is the “Tragedy of the
Commons.” Fishers have a right to the ﬁsh that
they catch through the rule of ﬁrst possession, according to which the ﬁrst party to use an unowned
resource acquires a claim to it (Cooter and Ulen
2004).2 This ownership rule, however, creates conditions for competitive open-access exploitation if
there are multiple users of the resource.
Regulated open access remains open to entrants, but participants are obligated to abide by
regulations, which are generally biologically motivated to hold aggregate harvests at sustainable
levels, such as a total allowable catch (TAC), or to
maintain a prescribed spawning biomass (Homans
and Wilen 1997).
State rights (res publicae), which are rights
held by the state, provide exclusive use by a
broadly deﬁned group. Individuals or groups may
be allowed to use the resource, but only according
to the rules established by the state or its managing
agency. Strictly speaking, EEZs are state property,
although in practice many EEZs are referred to as
open access because, on a de facto, although not
de jure, basis, access is open to all. When the state
does not regulate, the resource use is akin to open
access, even though the state is the legal owner
(Baland and Platteau 1996).
Property with exclusive use by a usually smaller
and better deﬁned group than the state is called
common property (res communes) (Baland and
Platteau 1996). The members of the group exclude those that are not members. Members
of the group have speciﬁed rights and duties.
Unregulated common property occurs when access rules prevail that deﬁne insiders, as opposed
to outsiders. Regulated common property occurs when not only is access delimited, but rules
of membership and use are also deﬁned. Common
property management implies collective regulations regarding both membership and the way to
use the resource, and the existence of monitoring and sanctioning procedures so that those rules

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

can be effectively enforced (Baland and Platteau
2005). Wade (1987), Ostrom (1990), Baland and
Platteau (1996, 2005), and Seabright (1997) have
extensively reviewed the conditions for effectively
regulated common property.3
Under common property, the right of exclusion
is assigned to a well-deﬁned group, whereas under open access, a right of inclusion is granted
to anyone who wants to use the resource (Baland
and Platteau 1996). Neither open access nor unregulated common property gives individuals the
proper incentives to act in a socially efﬁcient way.
Regulated common property has the potential to
provide proper incentives to individuals and the
group to conserve the resource stocks and ecosystem and maximize the sustainable economic surplus obtained by using the resource, along with
aligning the actions of the group with the interests
of society (Ostrom 1990, Bromley 1991, Baland
and Platteau 1996).4
Common property tends to emerge when the
demand on the resource is sufﬁciently high to
allow continued open access, but indivisibilities or
other factors preclude dividing up and allocating
the resource itself (Ostrom 1990, Baland and
Platteau 1996, 2005).5 Scale economies, arising
because of the indivisibilities, lie almost always on
the side of costs, if the alternative is to divide the
resource into several private portions that must be
enclosed and protected. The costs of negotiating,
deﬁning, and enforcing private property rights are
increasing with the physical base of the resource.
Such indivisibilities are pervasive for resources
that are highly mobile over large expanses of
space. Other indivisibilities include the costs of
collecting information and scientiﬁc assessment
of ﬁsh stocks. Scale economies may also arise in
beneﬁts, either in the resource itself, such as multiple products from the resource because they form
part of an overall ecosystem, such as ecosystem
services, or in complementary factors. Common
property also generates risk pooling by the holders
of the resource when there is sufﬁcient variation
in its returns across time and space. Common
property is less likely when the value of a resource
is high and enforcement costs of alternative

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

41

property forms, particularly private property, are
moderate. Common property entails considerable
transaction costs among the group owners and
arrangements for the distribution of shares of the
aggregate net beneﬁts among the owners.
Fishing rights held by individual ﬁshers or subgroups of ﬁshers may be nested within the common ﬁshing rights, but these are attenuated to
a varying extent by group or community rules
(Willmann 2000). Common ﬁshing rights are not
always as exclusive as private property or use, such
as individual transferable quotas (ITQs), either because of the group’s inability to ensure and protect
such exclusivity (the cost of doing so might be
prohibitive) or because the group willingly allows
others to share in the beneﬁts conferred by the
common ﬁshing rights.
Management systems in which groups or organizations of ﬁshers hold catch quotas in the
form of ﬁshing cooperatives are recently established forms of common rights. In most instances,
however, common rights are predicated on territorial rights to ﬁshing grounds, ﬁsh aggregating
devices, natural and artiﬁcial reefs, stretches of
rivers, or sections of bays and lakes (Willmann
2000). Willmann (2000: 1) observed that, “Within
such exclusive territories, use rights and/or utilization rules (e.g., type of gear; time of ﬁshing; etc.)
may be further deﬁned for speciﬁc ﬁsheries and
individual ﬁshers or groups of ﬁshers. Utilization
rules may change in accordance with variability in
resource availability and abundance.”
Private property (res privatae) occurs when an
individual, agent, or ﬁrm holds the rights. The private owner has the right to use and beneﬁt from the
exploitation, conservation, or sale of the resource.
Private property can exist only with state sanction
and protection, and does not necessarily imply the
absence of state control or regulation. Private property, when the owner is absent and careless about
the resource, is tantamount to open access because
formal or legal ownership rights are not actually
exercised (Baland and Platteau 1996).
Hybrid property in practice, overlapping combinations, or hybrids of property rights are imposed upon resources. As conditions change, one

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

42

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

form of right may predominate over another. Because of the prevalence of state property or other
forms of property rights embedded within the unit
of a state or a regional ﬁshery management organization (RFMO), coupled with the common pool
and renewable nature of common resources, some
form of comanagement generally accompanies the
hybrid rights.6

Use Rights
Use rights are distinguishable from property
rights. Property rights entail “ownership” of the
resource stock itself, but use rights do not.
Use rights instead pertain to exclusive utilization
or rights of access. States tend to retain ownership
of the property, and grant the right of use to individuals or groups. On the high seas, ownership of
a resources stock is increasingly held by an RFMO
essentially established through custom as international common property for a particular region or
species, which, in turn, grants the right of use to
states, individuals, or groups.
In the oceans, societies are reluctant to turn over
ownership of the actual ﬁsh stocks to individuals
or nonstate groups (Hannesson 2004). Instead, societies in the form of the state retain the property
right and instead grant rights of use to some of
the ﬂow from the resource stock (i.e., the catches)
to individuals, such as with ITQs, or to groups,
such as ﬁshing cooperatives.7 Societies also readily grant rights of exclusive access to the resource
stock to well-deﬁned groups, as with limited entry programs. In the United States, these use and
access rights are now deemed “Dedicated Access
Privileges,” emphasizing that they are use rights,
rather than property rights, and, in principle, revocable without compensation. The situation in
Canada is similar to that in the United States. In
contrast, in New Zealand use rights have a status
closer to property rights, and they can be held in
perpetuity.
Use rights face more uncertainty in quality of title or tenure, since the objectives of states can vary

over time as the nature of society changes. Similarly, the divisibility and duration of use rights are
typically less stable than those of property rights.
Customary use rights are those that have been
established by custom, rather than by a more formal process. Customary use rights, for example,
are those that have been established over time for
the right to ﬁsh for different species in speciﬁed
areas, perhaps at speciﬁed times, by native peoples or artisanal ﬁshers in developing or developed
countries. In contrast, a formal legal process establishes ITQs. Customary use rights are often in
conﬂict with, and in many instances superseded
by, rights established by a more formal process.
The Makah Indian tribe of the Olympic Peninsula
in the state of Washington, the United States, for
example, developed customary use rights to ﬁsh
for groundﬁsh, salmon, and whales, which were
denied by the Euro-Americans for many years, in
spite of a treaty, until they were reestablished. A
similar example is found with the Maori people of
New Zealand.
There are many good reasons why societies
seldom grant property rights to the stocks of living
marine organisms (Squires et al. 1995, Hannesson
2004).8 One is simply that property rights to
mobile organisms without static boundaries,
with the requisite enforcement costs supporting
exclusivity, are simply not practical, although they
are with sessile organisms, such as abalones and
other shellﬁsh. Similarly, indivisibilities of the
resource stock make granting property rights to
resource stocks difﬁcult. For example, the habitats
of ﬁsh stocks overlap, and the same ﬁshing gear
sometimes indiscriminately ﬁshes different stocks
(Hannesson 2004). The biological interactions
among resource stocks and the embedding of
ﬁsh stocks in an ecosystem with services far
beyond the ﬁsh that are caught also complicate
the establishment of property in ﬁsh stocks. Some
resource stocks straddle the EEZs of states or the
EEZ of a state and the high seas, and still others
are highly migratory and span multiple EEZs and
the high seas. Area rights, in contrast, pertain to
the spatial dimensions of the ocean, rather than
to the resource stocks. Private ownership also

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

excludes claims of nonmarket values society may
place on the organisms or the ecosystem.

Characteristics of Property and
Use Rights
Property and use rights may be described as
having ﬁve characteristics: exclusivity, transferability, duration, quality of title (security), and
divisibility (Scott 2000a, Grafton et al. 2004).
Property rights with these characteristics create
incentives for ﬁshers to identify with the longterm needs for resource conservation and the
opportunity to ensure beneﬁts from responsible
ﬁshing even if subsequently leaving the ﬁshery
(World Bank 2004).
Exclusivity (ins excludendi) is the most important characteristic. Exclusive use of the resource
by an individual, group, or state, also means
excluding others from using or beneﬁting from
the resource. For example, the EEZ provides the
state with exclusive use of the resources within
200 miles of its coast, but beyond 200 miles, on
the high seas, no individual, group, or state has
any exclusive use. Exclusivity may include the
right of access and enjoyment (ius utile), the right
of withdrawal (ius fruendi or usufructus), and
the right to prevent interference (ius excludendi)
(Grafton et al. 2004). Scott (2000a: 18) observes,
“Exclusivity is valued because it protects the
right-holder from interference with the ﬁsh
stock and with ﬁsh catching.” Enforcement and
protection of the exclusive use are critical for the
right to fully function.
Divisibility indicates the ability of the holder of
the right to divide up the environmental asset or
the ﬂow of beneﬁts from the asset. For example,
plots of land can be divided and subdivided into
smaller units, or quotas can be divided into smaller
units.
Transferability (ius disponendi) refers to the
ease by which owners may trade, give, or bequeath
the right. Transferability plays a key role in increasing economic efﬁciency, because the stronger

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

43

the transferability of a right, the easier it is to sell
the right to those with lowest costs. Fishing licenses may face different degrees of transferability. In some limited entry ﬁsheries, licenses are
not transferable, the intent being gradual dissolution of the ﬁshery. The lack of transferability lowers the value of a vessel. Divisibility can enhance
transferability, since it is often easier to exchange
smaller units of a right than a larger unit; sales of
smaller units of property are usually easier than
large tracts.
Duration is the length of time the right’s powers may be held. Rights might expire every year, as
do many ﬁshing licenses, or rights might extend
into perpetuity, as do most ownerships of land.
Duration facilitates investment and economic efﬁciency, since rights holders are more likely to
invest in or to husband a resource if they can
hold the right long enough to enjoy the fruits of
their labor. Attenuated duration facilitates new entrants into the industry and ﬂexibility of industry
structure, ownership, and concentration of rights,
wealth, and assets. Some ITQ systems establish
rights in perpetuity, while others expire after a limited amount of time. The effective total duration
after automatic renewals is the critical issue.
Quality of title (security) (ius possidendi) represents how well the property right is speciﬁed,
and includes the notion of possession and ownership (de facto and de jure). It refers to the extent
that the right is recognized in law, such as a title or certiﬁcate of ownership. Scott (2000a: 18)
notes, “Quality of title is valued because it saves
the right-holder from the costs of protecting and
enforcing his rights to be ﬁshing. In most public
ﬁsheries, the ﬁsherman’s right is secure; but he
may be surprised by new arrangements and regulations that in effect arbitrarily reduce the characteristics of his right.” Sykes (2010) emphasizes the
importance of secure property rights, particularly
for industry-led solutions to management problems, cooperation among themselves in general,
investment, and resource allocation in general.
Complete or fully structured property rights
are those that have all of these characteristics to
the fullest possible extent (Scott 2000a). The more

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

44

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

complete are property rights, the more the private
and social net beneﬁts of resource use coincide,
reducing externalities and the associated losses of
the common pool. The right of a ﬁsher under open
access is said to be incomplete or ill-structured because there is no exclusivity, long but meaningless
duration, substantial if inconsequential security,
no transferability, and inﬁnite divisibility. Under
private property, such as ITQs or effort, the individual right has exclusivity, substantial and consequential security, usually, but not always, considerable transferability, duration that is often, but
not always, in perpetuity and usually considerable
divisibility.
Rights are attenuated when the characteristics
of rights are limited in some manner. For example,
the Chilean industrial Patagonian toothﬁsh ﬁshery
ITQ limits duration to 10 years and the Namibian
hake ﬁshery ITQ does not allow transferability
(World Bank 2004).
Rights are said to be flexible when they readily accommodate or adapt to a changing world,
including climate, ecosystems, markets, and economic systems in general. Rights should allow
adaptability of user groups for economic and social beneﬁts and sustainable resource use. Excessive rigidity of the right can lower economic efﬁciency or limit the accommodation of the ﬁshery
sector. The characteristics of excludability, duration, and universality are particularly important
in this regard. Consider climate change and ﬂexibility. Short-, medium-, and long-term climate
change leads to changes in the ecosystem and/or
locations of ﬁsh stocks. Rights that do not allow
sufﬁcient ﬂexibility for resource users to adapt
their location, type of ﬁshing (including gear), and
species harvested can leave user groups stranded
and over- or underexploitation of resource stocks.
Northward and southward movements of small
pelagic species in eastern boundary currents with
climate change can leave communities and ﬁshers stranded. The U.S. ﬁsheries of the northwestern Atlantic provide another example for which
climate change, overharvesting, and other factors
have led to decreasing abundance of groundﬁsh
and increasing abundance of crustaceans, such as

lobsters and crabs. A rigid property rights system
can block ﬁshers from switching back and forth as
ecosystems change. ITQs can also lock in ﬁshers.
Contracting describes efforts by individuals to
assign or to modify property rights (Cheung 1970,
Libecap 1989). Contracting includes both private
bargaining to assign or adjust informal ownership
arrangements and lobby efforts to deﬁne, administer, and modify more formal property institutions.

Types of Fishing Rights
A management system that establishes and allocates rights in the ﬁshery can take many forms,
and can be classiﬁed according to the basic type
of property or use right (e.g., common or private property) and the presence (or absence) and
strength of the characteristics of property rights
(i.e., exclusivity, transferability, etc.). The term
“dedicated access privileges” is sometimes applied (especially in the United States) to limited
entry or limited access, cooperatives or voluntary
agreements, ITQs, territorial rights, and community development quotas.
Because the oceans are not practically divisible
and costs of exclusion, monitoring, transactions,
and enforcement are higher, these property and use
rights are normally less complete than, say, enclosing land for farming, such as through the Enclosure Acts in England or enclosure of the Scottish
Highlands. Ideally, these rights would be deﬁned to
provide two fundamental incentives: (1) incentives
for the industry to conduct its operations efﬁciently
and (2) incentives for preserving the productivity
of the ﬁsh stocks (Hannesson 2005, Grafton et al.
2006). Eventually, as rights further develop in response to the rising and increasingly apparent economic and ecological costs and beneﬁts of ﬁshing,
such rights would encompass ecological functions
and services and the maintenance of biodiversity.
Importantly, in ﬁsheries a distinction can be
made over the resource stock and the ﬂow from
this resource stock in the form of catches. Stocks,
such as the level of the resource stock, can be
added to and subtracted from by ﬂows, such as

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

recruitment and growth or natural and ﬁshing mortality. This stock-ﬂow production process means
that one form of property or use right can be established over the resource stock and another form
over the resource ﬂow. The spatial dimension to a
number of resource stocks and their ﬁsheries also
allows the potential for different forms of property
or use rights over the resource stocks and catches
following different political or jurisdictional delineations, such as straddling stocks that lie in both
state EEZs and the high seas or highly migratory
species that transverse state EEZs and the high
seas.
There are few instances in which private or corporate rights have been established over resource
stocks; abalones in South Africa are one exception. Several reasons account for this (Hannesson
2004). Countries may be reluctant to give up ownership of what is regarded as the common property
of the nation. Many stocks migrate across national
boundaries and even the high seas, so management
of private stocks and enforcement of the property
right can be limiting. Because of movements of
ﬁsh stocks, the geographical jurisdiction of the
right may have to be extensive. Habitats of different species stocks may also overlap, and different stocks are ﬁshed indiscriminately by different
gear. The more complex the ecosystem and the
more varied the different species exploited, the
more difﬁcult it is to establish such rights and the
more geographically extensive they may be.

Limited Entry or Limited Access
A ﬁshing license is a right of access to the ﬁshery, but because this right is only one of access
and does not provide exclusive use of the resource
stock or the ﬂow from the stock (i.e., catch), vessels then compete with each other to take as large
a portion of the ﬁsh stock or sustainable target
catch as possible during the period allowed for
ﬁshing. The license gives its rights holders relatively weak characteristics (Scott 2000b). Limited
entry is no longer open access, since some potential users are excluded. Although the rights of
those who might ﬁsh are far from perfectly ex-

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

45

clusive, there is some degree of exclusivity. The
quality of title and security is also stronger than
open access. Licenses are usually no longer free.
The state generally has to honor the license, and
cannot capriciously cancel them, take them back,
or reduce their content. The state must also protect the holder’s right to the license. Limited entry
programs differ in their transferability. Some programs allow freely transferable rights; others do
not allow transferability, the intent being a gradual
reduction in licenses through attrition and retirement. The lack of transferability lowers the value
of ﬁshing assets, including the license and the vessel. Duration also varies, with some rights held in
perpetuity and others that expire with the exit of
the holder from the ﬁshery.
In transnational ﬁsheries on shared resource
stocks, such as tunas and other highly migratory
species, a limited entry program creates a form of
common property instead of high-seas open access, such as is accomplished by the Northern Fur
Seal Treaty (Barrett 2003, 2005). The common
property and limited entry program can be created
by customary international law through the auspices of an RFMO, such as the closed Regional
Vessel Register of the Inter-American Tropical
Tuna Commission (IATTC). Nothing in the LOS
or the UNIA prevents creation of a limited entry
program and common property through a formal
and binding international agreement, which may
be regional instead of global.
The effect of limited entry programs on incentives varies with the numbers of participants
allowed by the program (Wilen 1988, Townsend
1990). Many programs are little more than moratoriums on new entry, and are instituted when conditions in the ﬁshery have reached a serious state
of losses and declining resource stocks. The most
effective programs are those that are the most restrictive, especially in terms of the numbers and
qualifying criteria for inclusion. The larger the inclusion, the closer the ﬁshery is to open access, and
the more the incentives approach those of open access. Because the race to ﬁsh is seldom dampened
with the incomplete right of limited entry, ﬁshers often continue to invest, add inputs, and adopt

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

46

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

new technology, all of which increase ﬁshing capacity and productivity. In contrast, sufﬁciently
small numbers, perhaps coupled with area dimensions to the limited entry, may facilitate cooperative behavior among ﬁshers and greater alignment
of conservation and economic incentives to maintain the license value and health of the resource
for future use.
Asymmetric information is an important issue
in all forms of ﬁshery management, but especially
under limited access. A moral hazard problem is
created between the principal (ﬁshery manager)
and the agents (ﬁshers) (Salvanes and Squires
1995).9 This information problem arises because
the ﬁshery manager does not have complete information about all variables for regulation (Jensen
and Vestergaard 2002, Squires et al. 2003). Hence,
the regulator cannot easily and at low cost monitor
and enforce the number of vessels, the zones that
they ﬁsh in, gear conﬂicts, levels of harvest and
species composition, discards and illegal landings,
levels and mixes of inputs, and the like. In turn,
ﬁshers face economic incentives to shirk through
avoiding license registration and payment of license fees and taxes and ignoring gear regulations
and other requirements for monitoring, enforcement, and regulation.
In short, experience with limited entry has
shown that excessive exploitation of the ﬁshery
resources and excess ﬁshing capacity often remain. In contrast, when limited entry is instituted
in the very early phases of a ﬁshery development
in which economic rents are still being generated,
limited entry can be successful, as in the Western
Australian prawn ﬁsheries; in contrast, limited entry is usually introduced only when there is already
overﬁshing and overcapacity.
Most notably, limited entry licenses are imperfect rights that do not directly limit the catch of
ﬁsh and/or solve the incomplete property rights
of open access, leaving the open-access incentives
intact (Townsend 1990, Scott 2000b). It is also notoriously difﬁcult to deﬁne a unique relationship
between a vessel license and the resulting ﬁshing
capacity in that a vessel license gives ﬁshers an
incentive to increase the use of unregulated eco-

nomic inputs not speciﬁed and regulated by the
license. When rights are incompletely speciﬁed,
each individual stands to increase his other share
of the catch by expanding ﬁshing capacity through,
for example, increasing vessel size when the number of vessels is limited, or, if vessel size is also
restricted, by expanding unregulated engine horsepower and gear size or by adding electronic gear.
Technical progress cannot be blocked, and it expands ﬁshing capacity and productivity. Nonetheless, when the alternative of an ITQ system is not
feasible and when the conditions are right, limited entry may be the second-best solution, and, in
most instances, can be viewed as a necessary, if
not sufﬁcient, condition for effective conservation
and management. License limitation is easier and
less costly to enforce, since catches or landings do
not have to be monitored—only the number of vessels. Certain ﬁsheries may also be better managed
by limits on inputs than on catches.

Voluntary Agreements or Fishing
Cooperatives
Voluntary agreements or ﬁshing cooperatives are
decentralized group management that allocate all
or part of the available use right among various
ﬁshing and processing entities within a ﬁshery via
formal or informal contractual agreements. Some
cooperatives are organized around gear, such as
the U.S. Cape Cod Hook and Line cooperative
or the Inshore Potting Agreement operated by
inshore ﬁshers of South Devon, England, while
others are spatially organized, such as the nine Baja
California (Mexico) cooperatives for lobster and
abalone; spatial-based cooperatives may closely
resemble territorial use rights for ﬁsheries (see
below).
The use right is most typically a share of the
TAC (sector quota), which is then internally allocated among group members by criteria, such as
landings, based over some time period or share of
quota holdings. This right can also have a spatial
dimension, including an area right and/or management. The scale can be local or regional. These
voluntary agreements among vessel owners can

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

reduce ﬁshing costs, improve the market value,
confer greater control over decisions affecting
livelihoods, and in general provide the advantages
of rights-based management. Huppert (2005: 207)
notes, “Generally, ﬁshing cooperatives accomplish
through contract what the individual ﬁshing quotas
do by government regulation. The cooperatives, in
effect, create private company shares of the TAC
through written agreement.” Cooperatives allow
more decentralized management that is more directly tailored to different groups as deﬁned by
species, gear, port or area, or other means (Pinto
da Silva and Kitts 2006). Cooperatives can range
from comprehensive programs that largely replace
government management to short-term allocation
agreements (Townsend 2005).
Fishing cooperatives based on exclusive use of
group catch quotas are found in the Netherlands,
New Zealand, the Philippines, Senegal, the United
Kingdom, New Zealand, Canada, and the United
States (Willmann 2000, Kitts and Edwards 2003,
Townsend 2005, Pinto da Silva and Kitts 2006).
Producer organizations in the Netherlands and
the United Kingdom have been given the right to
distribute quotas among their members. In New
Zealand, Maori have been assigned both territorial
and quota-based ﬁshing rights. The Australian
Heard Island-McDonald Island (HIMI) toothﬁsh
and mackerel iceﬁsh ﬁshery is ﬁshed cooperatively to allow economies of scale (Sykes 2010).
Fisheries cooperatives in the Norwegian Lofoten
ﬁshery undertake various regulatory functions,
primarily based on input limitations, along with
technical management measures such as closed
seasons and areas (Jentoft and Kristoffersen
1989). The matjes herring ﬁshery, participated in
by vessels of three countries, Denmark, Norway,
and Sweden, entails a voluntary agreement among
the producers that coordinates the time of harvests
to maximize quality and value (Townsend 2005).
Some U.S. cooperatives include the Bering Sea
pollock cooperative, the Paciﬁc hake cooperative,
the Georges Bank Hook Sector allocation, and the
New England Red Crab Harvesters Association.
Voluntary agreements, from one perspective,
provide exclusive use to a well-deﬁned group,

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

47

forming regulated common use rights. Voluntary
agreements can also be viewed within the context of comanagement (a process whereby decision
making is shared between the regulatory authority
and ﬁshery stakeholder groups).10
The group objectives can vary widely from
strictly economic to encompass a wide range of
goals and objectives that extend beyond merely
ﬁshing and economics to include social, cultural,
community, and ecological goals (Pinto da Silva
and Kitts 2006). Nonetheless, cooperatives are
more likely to be linked by commercial, rather than
social and cultural, interests (Townsend 2005). Cooperatives can also engage in research organized
and ﬁnanced entirely through their own efforts,
as in New Zealand by the New Zealand Orange
Roughy Management Company, or cooperatively
with the management authority, as with the Cape
Cod hook and line cooperative in New England
(Pinto da Silva and Kitts 2006, Sykes 2010).
Fishing cooperatives are not independent of
government action, in that it has occurred
among resource users within various rightsbased regimes, including limited entry and ITQs
(Townsend 2005). In fact, cooperatives more readily function when government has already implemented limited entry, since limited entry addresses
the most difﬁcult problem of private bargaining:
which agents must bargain (Townsend 2005). Limited entry thereby provides a stable universe of
players and a means of accommodating new ones.
Government deﬁnes rights that reduce transaction
costs among private agents who develop efﬁcient
ways to exploit the resource. A critical issue is the
durability and certainty of the group allocation of
the overall use right and how the group itself handles this uncertainty.
Voluntary agreements may be less durable than
ITQs, due to the inherent issues involved with
cooperative exploitation of a resource by a group,
including interﬁrm formal or informal contracting or cooperation in general, monitoring, and
enforcement.
Voluntary agreements can be analyzed by the
characteristics of property rights. When there are
catch rights, as shares of the TAC, these use rights

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

48

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

can be divisible into very small units. The rights
can be transferable within the group through various forms of internal or market allocation processes. Various degrees of divisibility of the right
are allowed, depending upon the form of the arrangement. Transferability of harvest use rights
from inside and outside of the cooperative or entry of vessels into and outside of the cooperative raises issues pertaining to allocation within
the group and cooperative membership.11 Some
cooperatives can adopt use right allocation and
transfer rules that create de facto ITQs. The cooperative among Paciﬁc whiting catcher-processors
is an example. The duration of the right or contract
depends on the relationship between the collaborative group and the regulator and the laws and
regulatory institutions. The security of title varies
according to the laws and regulatory institutions of
the nation. In the United States, for example, conditions must be established to ensure that antitrust
measures are not implemented (Sullivan 2000).
Uncertainty is created when the security of title is
unclear, as with the Montauk Tileﬁsh Association
in New England (Pinto da Silva and Kitts 2006).
Use rights are allocated to groups for joint
harvest, rather than to individuals, as with ITQs,
raising the issues of group deﬁnition, internal
organization and management and associated contracting and transactions costs, internal allocation
of the use right and responsibilities, monitoring,
and enforcement. Cooperative behavior is most
likely to succeed when the membership to the
group is well deﬁned and limited in size, the members share common interests in improved resource
use, effective monitoring systems are in place, and
there are effective conﬂict resolution mechanisms
(Ostrom 1990, Baland and Platteau 1996, 2005,
Seabright 1997). Decision making varies and includes consensus and voting (Pinto da Silva and
Kitts 2006). Townsend (2005) observes that these
voluntary agreements perform well with small
ﬂeets under corporate ownership, since corporate
managers have signiﬁcant experience with negotiations and contracts, hence lowering transactions
costs. New entrants must both acquire shares and
enter into membership in the group. The durability

of the group depends on the renewal and termination provisions, along with factors fostering
cooperative behavior. Defection from the group
can leave it untouched or it can be destabilizing,
depending on the group’s organization. A welldeﬁned dissolution mechanism for the group and
alternative plans can be important in case the cooperative is unsuccessful (Pinto da Silva and Kitts
2006).
Asymmetric information problems arise, both
between the ﬁshing cooperative and management
authority (a general problem between all vessels
and the authority) and between individual members and the cooperative.
The economic advantages of voluntary agreements include the potential of lower transaction
costs in the management of a ﬁshery compared
to centralized management or individual property
rights (i.e., savings in information, monitoring and
enforcement costs through the use of information
held privately by ﬁshers, and the use of social capital embedded in local and professional organizations and institutions) (Willmann 2000). Greater
ﬂexibility in ﬁshery management is also possible
compared to centralized management by the regulatory authority (Townsend 2005). The greater
certainty in a prescribed quantity of ﬁsh to catch,
that is, exclusivity, creates economic incentives
that more closely match individual behavior with
socially optimal exploitation; such beneﬁts depend
on the security of title, duration of the right, and the
nature of the informal and/or formal contract with
the management authority and among group members. As with ITQs, voluntary agreements can also
lead to improvements in product quality and product forms and new markets, such as from frozen to
fresh, more on-board processing and stricter quality standards, and extension of the season length
due to coordinated ﬁshing among the members,
thereby increasing value added. Transferability in
the short term allows matching catches with catch
rights and in the long term allows the optimal scale
and timing of harvesting (and processing) and the
optimal investment in the capital stock. In short,
individual ﬁrms in the cooperative can focus on
maximizing revenues and minimizing short-run

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

and long-run costs, subject to the uncertainty of
the durability of the cooperative.
Governments often conduct monitoring and enforcement as part of the general process for all
ﬁshing vessels, regardless of whether these vessels are part of a cooperative. Cooperatives have
an incentive to lower the transaction costs of monitoring (Townsend 2005), and through lower costs
and the need for monitoring for the cooperative to
properly function, the amount of monitoring can
even increase. Penalties or negative economic incentives may be created between the cooperative
and the management authority and among members of the cooperative to deter cheating and free
riding.
Fishing cooperatives, by lowering transactions
and information costs, coordinating activities and
sharing information, and developing new technologies, might form to voluntarily tackle bycatch.
Such voluntary agreements have been adopted in
Alaska and in the regional sea turtle program in
the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean to address bycatch. Voluntary agreements are applied on land to address
pollution due to credible threats from regulators
(Segerson and Miceli 1998). Fishing cooperatives
do not inherently incorporate public good externalities, such as ecosystems and their services and
maintenance of biodiversity.

Territorial Rights
Territorial (spatial) use or property rights allocate
exclusive use to a speciﬁed area of the ocean to a
single user, most often a group, but the owner can
also be an individual or corporation. The group, in
turn, informally or formally allocates use rights to
its members. Territorial rights, under certain conditions and when effectively managed, are sometimes seen as an effective alternative to private
rights, such as ITQs.12 Territorial rights differ from
ocean zoning or area management, which restricts
ﬁshing in different areas but does not confer a
property or use right. Catch, effort, vessel and
gear restrictions, exclusions, and temporary or permanent closures are commonly speciﬁed by area
(Branch et al. 2006).

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

49

Territorial rights include informal ﬁshing territories, customary marine tenure, and territorial use
rights in ﬁsheries (TURFs). TURFs are formally
assigned exclusive use rights conferred to an area
or group (Christy 1983). Territorial rights create
a form of regulated common property to an area,
giving informal or formal rights to harvest ﬁsh and
the right to exclude other ﬁshers. Territorial rights
can be interpreted to include area rights, that is,
rights to spatially distinct and well-deﬁned areas of
the ocean. Territorial rights are also related to spatially delineated ITQs, except that territorial rights
usually relate to a property right over an area and
to all species and the ecosystem in general, rather
than to individual species. Territorial rights are
often viewed as a way to implement communitybased ﬁshery management (Hannesson 2004).
TURFs can be distinguished from ﬁsher’s cooperatives or associations (Christy 2000). TURFs are
based on exclusive rights to a (portion of the) resource with a spatial dimension, whereas the latter
are not.
Territorial rights are often found in small closeknit communities of inshore or reef ﬁshers for
shellﬁsh, lobsters, and some ﬁsh, forming a type of
marine tenure (Johannes 1978, 1988, Cinner 2005,
Cinner and Awani 2007). Christy (1983) points out
that less mobile, less migratory species are more
suitable for territorial rights. Territorial rights can
similarly be applicable to sedentary stocks and
ﬁxed gear ﬁsheries.
Formal territorial rights are used to manage inshore ﬁsheries in Japan, especially sedentary resources, for which these rights are usually assigned
to ﬁshers’ associations or Fishery Cooperative Associations (FCAs), rather than to individuals or
ﬁrms (Asada et al. 1983, Ruddle and Akimichi
1984, Ruddle 1987, Yamamoto 1995, Baland and
Platteau 1996, Cancino et al. 2007). To collectively manage the territorial rights, the FCAs are
sometimes subdivided into smaller and more specialized groups that manage single species within
the territorial right. The lobster ﬁshery of Maine
is a well-known example of an informal territorial
right (Acheson 1975). Informal territorial rights
are also found in Nova Scotian and Scottish salmon

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

50

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

ﬁsheries (Ostrom 1990). Formal territorial rights
are used in the Italian clam ﬁsheries (Spagnolo and
Sabatella 2007). Territorial rights are also used
to manage the ocean quahog ﬁshery in Iceland,
oysters in the United States, mussels and scallops
in New Zealand, the Challenger scallop ﬁshery
in New Zealand, lakes and some coastal areas in
Sweden, and aquaculture in Mexico (OECD
2006). Territorial rights are also used for some
offshore ﬁsheries, including offshore aquaculture
of blueﬁn tunas and salmon in Norway, Chile, and
Mexico. Territorial rights are also used to manage inshore ﬁsheries in Chile (Gonzalez 1996,
González et al. 2006), especially the gastropod
loco (an abalone) for which they have apparently
been used with great success (Bernal et al. 1999,
González et al. 2006, Cancino et al. 2007). Territorial rights may be one of the few practical ways
to manage some artisanal ﬁsheries, especially in
tropical countries where marine ecosystems have
many species and complex multispecies interactions (Christy 2000). Territorial rights can be expected to grow in importance with aquaculture and
mariculture of all types.
Informal territorial rights refer to spatially delineated ﬁshing rights that are not enshrined in traditional custom or which are not part of formal law,
but instead arise through custom and practice. The
“lobster gangs” of Maine exemplify such, where
individuals living in communities adjacent to the
resource hold the rights (Acheson 1975). The exact
boundaries of the right are developed and enforced
by custom and social norms, but because they are
not formally delineated, such boundaries can be
open to constant challenge and redeﬁnement. Active, but informal, processes exist by which exclusive use is enforced, including verbal threats,
patrols, and, in some instances, through damage
of encroaching gear or even retaliation in other
areas. These rights have, to some extent, been recognized by the state of Maine and incorporated
into the formal management of lobsters.
Customary marine tenure systems are one form
of territorial right that is found in the IndoPaciﬁc (Ruddle and Akimichi 1984, Aikimich
1984, Johannes 1988, 2002, Aswani 2006, Branch

et al. 2006, Cinner and McClanachan 2006).
Cinner (2005: 36) observes that “These marine
tenure institutions can range from relatively simple communally-owned marine areas from which
outsiders are excluded to the complex and overlapping system of individual and family rights to
space, species, gear, and even speciﬁc techniques
of using gear.” Villages declare marine reserves,
exclude others from exploiting resources in their
territory, manage the types of gears used, and restrict ﬁshing on certain species.
Territorial rights, in some instances, are thought
to spatially allocate ﬁshing effort that achieves an
economic optimum (Christy 1983, Cancino et al.
2007). In Japan, ﬁshing effort within a TURF can
be allocated to mitigate inefﬁcient allocation of effort over space. Because ﬁshing effort is restricted
among TURFs, efﬁcient allocation of effort across
a spatial dimension larger than a single TURF is
not automatically realized, but Branch et al. (2006)
observe that ﬁshers generally allocate ﬁshing effort to equalize catch per unit of effort (and, by
implication, proﬁtability) over large areas.
More generally, territorial rights, as a form of
common property, in principle, has an advantage
over a centralized regulating agency in achieving economic efﬁciency through the potential of
rights holders for possessing sufﬁcient knowledge
about the state of the resource, its ﬂow of use, and
the identity and actions of its users to be able to
manage it directly in a more economically efﬁcient manner (Baland and Platteau 1996, Cinner
2005). Such rights also are a de facto method of
pooling the users’ risks and substitutes for missing
insurance markets. Such rights also more directly
tackle distributive effects of resource allocation
decisions.
Territorial rights, in principle, can increase economic efﬁciency by internalizing spatial externalities (such as larval spillovers from source to sink
populations, ﬁsh movement among areas, growth,
multispecies interactions, and ecosystem considerations) within a single institution, allowing the
territorial rights to address these spatial externalities and to lower economic and ecological costs.
From the perspective of Coase (1937, 1960) and

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

the boundaries of the market and ﬁrms, territorial rights can be viewed as corresponding to the
incorporation of market, ecological, and other factors internal to the territorial right, rather than
allowing these activities to remain external to the
organization (Robert Deacon, personal communication).
To internalize spatial externalities, the spatial
scale of the territorial rights should correspond
to the scales at which the larval dispersal and
stock-recruitment processes operate, and at which
forage ﬁsh even move, thereby generating ﬁshing communities’ incentives to protect local stocks
(Hilborn et al. 2005). Without such a correspondence, future recruitment into one territorial right
depends not only on its own local stock, but also
on neighboring territorial right’s resource stocks,
a clear indication of a common resource with a
remaining ecological externality. Overﬁshing in
one territorial right might otherwise be subsidized by recruitment from stocks of territorial
rights practicing sound management. Other potential asymmetric externalities remain, such as
an “upstream” territorial right holder overexploiting a mobile ﬁsh before it can reach the “downstream” TURF’s area. These considerations help
explain why spatial rights are commonly found on
coral reefs and with shellﬁsh and similar benthic
resources.
Territorial rights do not necessarily and inherently incorporate externalities related to nonmarket economic values ﬂowing from public goods,
such as maintenance of biodiversity or ecosystems
and their services, which extend beyond the spatial
boundaries to the entire population. In other words,
although territorial rights under some conditions
can potentially provide efﬁcient exploitation of a
common resource and public good of the ecosystem and its services, leading to optimizing direct
and even indirect use values, territorial rights do
not necessarily lead to the efﬁcient provision of
any public goods (or avoidance of public bads) related to the ecosystem that may well transcend the
spatial boundaries of the territorial right or that do
not correspond to the commercial species of concern to the rights holders. Similar consideration

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

51

holds for the maintenance of biodiversity, which
is also a public good.
Collective use of the territorial rights’ resources
may require various types of assignment arrangements among ﬁshers to solve problems of congestion and overexploitation of resources in a patchy
environment, to achieve economic efﬁciency in
general, and to maintain group harmony. More
generally, this is an issue in the relationship between resources and the user group, that is, obtaining congruence between appropriation, provision rules, and local conditions (Wade 1987,
Ostrom 1990, Baland and Platteau 1996). Such
resource allocation decisions are potentially contentious because they require agreements on the
distribution of wealth, are difﬁcult to implement
when a new territorial right is established after
open access and resource depletion, and may be
one of the major impediments to the establishment of effective management of common property and territorial rights (Libecap 1989, Christy
2000). See, for example, Alexander (1980, 1982)
and the rotation of beach seine groups among different ﬁshing grounds in Sri Lankan ﬁshing villages. Similarly, Japanese and Chilean TURFs rotate ﬁshing over areas of different proﬁtability to
smooth out differences in proﬁts, incomes, and
ﬁshing opportunities (Cancino et al. 2007). These
arrangements are similar to those in Sri Lankan
ﬁshing villages in which elaborate rotational and
distributional mechanisms have evolved. Estuarine salmon ﬁshers in Teelin Bay, Ireland, use a
rotation system of access to the most productive
ﬁshing spots (Baland and Platteau 1996). Nova
Scotian inshore ﬁshers, in some cases, have used
lottery systems to allocate the best locations. More
broadly, management rules may be required for the
resources within the territorial rights’ boundaries;
Baland and Platteau (1996) emphasize that common property institutions can give economically
efﬁcient resource allocations, but require effective
management to do so.
Correspondence between the physical boundary
of the renewable resource stock and the territorial
right leads to the well-known common-pool
problem that arises with other such spatially

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

52

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

distributed resources, notably underground
aquifers and oil pools (Libecap 1989). When
the physical boundary of a common property
resource is not well deﬁned and is unstable, then
the conditions for effective conservation and
management decline (Wade 1987, Ostrom 1990,
Baland and Platteau 1996). Thus, if the renewable
resource stock lies wholly within the territorial
right, then the territorial right essentially amounts
to ownership of the stock. Conversely, with
species that move beyond the territorial right or
stocks that straddle one or more territorial rights,
the common resource problem resulting in the associated externality and overexploitation results.
Complications arise when the physical boundary
of the territorial right does not always have a stable
relationship with the delineation of the resource
and ecosystem, as is the case with climate change
in which the territorial right may no longer
correspond to where the resource has shifted.
Territorial rights can, in principle, reformulate
to accommodate remaining, or even shifting,
externalities. For example, two territorial rights
that are too small to accommodate downstream
externalities between the two territorial rights can
be combined to form a single territorial right,
thereby internalizing the externality by enlarging
the territorial right. The key element to resolving
these externalities is to allow exchange and/or
reformulation of the territorial rights. Information
and transactions costs can impede such Coasian
bargaining between two different territorial rights
holders. Coordination occurs among Japanese
TURFs, including development of formal coordinating bodies, and there have even been mergers
for ﬁsh populations that move across boundaries
in their yearly cycle (Baland and Platteau 1996,
Christy 2000, Cancino et al. 2007). Beneﬁt and
cost-sharing rules for the joint exploitation and
management of a common resource may have to
account for the direct proportion of the relative
amounts of the individual territorial right’s net
gains.
Several other critical issues arise. One of the
most important is setting a TAC for ﬁsh or
other species that span more than one territorial

right area and allocating shares to the individual
TURFs. The more mobile or seasonal or otherwise
variable the species and its abundance, the greater
the number of species and ecosystem complexity,
the greater the current depletion, and other related
factors, the more complex the undertaking. A contracting and comanagement issue then arises in
coordinating the allocated shares of the TAC with
the different individual territorial rights.
Sustainable catch targets must also be developed for populations entirely contained within a
territorial right, such as with a sedentary and sessile populations (e.g., on a coral reef that does not
span two or more territorial rights). Such targets
can be formal or informal, and if the latter, may be
developed over time through community or association knowledge built up over time. Christy (2000:
127) observes, “It is quite likely that there is a high
degree of knowledge about the location and seasonality of individual stocks within a community’s
ﬁshing area, but it is not necessarily true that this
knowledge comprehends the relationship between
ﬁshing effort and yield . . . . In this regard, the function of acquiring information on stock yields cannot always be fulﬁlled solely by the community.”
When establishing a new territorial right, a contracting problem arises. In addition to the issue
discussed above, allocation within the group and
allocation issues outside the group arise. For example, multiple groups of ﬁshers deﬁned by gear
or location may exploit the same territory. Both
recreational and commercial ﬁshers may exploit
the same resource stocks in a territory. Environmentalists may have concerns over ecosystems and
maintenance of biodiversity within a territory. Different issues arise between resource exploitation,
ecosystems and their services, and maintenance of
biodiversity. As with all allocation decisions, different distributions of wealth and net beneﬁts are
implied, since property rights involve the assignment of exclusive decision making over valuable
resources, and some parties will be harmed by
the new deﬁnition of wealth and political power
(Libecap 1989). Disagreements can occur over
the nature of either the aggregate beneﬁts or the
shares. Compensating those potentially harmed in

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

the proposed deﬁnition of rights and increasing the
shares of inﬂuential parties may produce a political consensus for the proposed institutional change
(Libecap 1989). Those parties who have had informal claims or have been unusually productive
under the status quota may be made worse off
unless their claims or productivity are recognized
(Libecap 1989). Prior production or prior possession often forms the basis of formal rights allocation. If inﬂuential parties cannot be sufﬁciently
compensated, say through side payments from
gainers, new territorial rights may not emerge,
even if this institutional change would yield net
beneﬁts for society. Informational problems can
introduce complications even if such an accord
can potentially be reached (Libecap 1989).
Well-deﬁned, clear-cut membership and composition of the group is always critical for effective functioning of common property (Wade 1987,
Libecap 1989, Ostrom 1990, Baland and Platteau 1996).13 Group size and homogeneity can
have signiﬁcant impacts. In Japan, membership
in FCAs is restricted to resident ﬁshers in the
jurisdictional area of the FCA who ﬁsh for 90–
120 days per year, the precise period deﬁned by
each FCA (Ruddle 1987). Even deﬁning the group
and its membership and deﬁning a ﬁsher are not
always clear-cut, and if territorial rights are newly
established or were formerly weak, this problem
becomes even more acute, since questions of patterns of distribution in wealth and power arise
(Christy 2000). For example, multiple gear types
and groups or communities may exploit the same
ﬁshing grounds in which a TURF is contemplated.
Some ﬁshers may be part-time and others fulltime, with, for example, seasonal participation in
ﬁshing depending on seasonal variations in the
availability of resource stocks, or some kinds of
gear may use casual labor.
Questions of entry and exit of the association
or community are critical because limits on entry
and deﬁnitions of exclusive use are fundamental
to a well-functioning property or use right. Conditions and rules, either formal or informal, determine membership, and vary in accordance with
whether the group is a small-scale ﬁshing com-

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

53

munity or ﬁsher association (Christy 2000). “The
traditional rules governing membership in a community and the ﬁshery are likely to be subjected to
considerable pressure in communities that receive
a territorial use-right” (Christy 2000: 124). Membership issues heighten when ﬁshery management
is more successful, and ﬁsheries communities and
the population of ﬁshers are far from static.
Enforcement of the territorial rights, including
or excluding nonowners, when there are mixed
industrial and artisanal ﬁsheries, can pose challenges. In Japan, the development of industrial
trawling and entry into coastal waters traditionally
associated with FCAs and TURFs created such
problems (Ruddle 1987). The practical impossibility of enforcing any kind of regulation in a
small-scale ﬁshery for which landings take place
in remote locations along a long coastline was addressed in Chile by granting secure access rights to
ﬁshers’ organizations, providing them incentives
to protect their resources themselves (González
et al. (2006).

Individual Transferable Quotas
ITQs are a form of private use right (Christy
1973). An ITQ provides an individual ﬁsher
or ﬁshing ﬁrm the right to harvest a deﬁned
proportion, either an absolute amount or, more
usually, a percentage, of the TAC within a given
period, such as a year or season (Squires et al.
1995, Scott 2000a, 2000b, Hannesson 2004,
World Bank 2004). The state retains ownership
of the resource stock, and the regulatory ﬁshery
body continues to deﬁne the TAC for the ﬁshery.
Property, as ﬁsh, passes to the operator only
through the rule of ﬁrst possession, that is, after
capture. ITQs are used in Australia, Canada,
Chile, Estonia, Iceland, Greenland, Namibia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, and the United States
(OECD 2006). No ﬁshery has abandoned an ITQ
policy, once it has been implemented.
ITQs can be evaluated in terms of the characteristics of property rights (Grafton et al. 2000,
Scott 2000b). The exclusive use pertains to a use
right over the catch, but not the resource stock or

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

54

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

the aquatic habitat, that is, ITQs are a usufruct
right. The holder’s right is in co-use with other
holders. The ﬁsh stock’s ownership is retained by
the state within the EEZ. The duration of quota
shares can be more than one season, but not always
into perpetuity. In a few instances, the duration is
limited and the right must be periodically renewed.
ITQs are transferable and are bought and sold in
markets. ITQs, like all assets, acquire present values related to the expected net present value of
the catch over time. ITQs are often transferred in
the short run to balance underages and overages of
quotas, and their value in this instance corresponds
to a rental price. In some instances, ITQ transferability is attenuated in the early years of a program
to allow rights-holders time to become acquainted
with the new system and to protect small communities and small-scale ﬁshers. ITQs are often, but
not always, divisible into smaller units to facilitate exchange. The quality of title and security are
often similar to licenses, and as a form of right
are sometimes similar to that of other kinds of
real property, with the legal status of property, and
sometimes simply a use right, subject to renewal
and regulation. Scott (2000b) observed that in the
introduction of the ITQ, especially in offshore ﬁsheries, the ﬁshers were transported from holding the
individual powers inherent in an ordinary transferable license, with a little inherent exclusivity,
to holding a property right with enforceable characteristics, in positive amounts, of long duration,
transferability, exclusivity, and security.
ITQs, by more fully strengthening the characteristics of rights, especially exclusivity, greatly
strengthen the incentives of ﬁshers to utilize the
resource to obtain the greatest possible sustainable beneﬁts and to conserve the resource. In
other words, ITQs provide harvesters with longterm and secure rights that are legally enforceable.
Transfers of individual harvesting rights can also
help reduce overcapacity and restructure industry to more closely align with a proﬁtable ﬁshery.
Speciﬁcally, transferability in the long run allows
the appropriate investment in ﬁshing vessels, gear,
and equipment and the choice of an optimal scale
and timing of harvesting and processing, if the

catch is processed at sea. ITQs can also help alter
the length of a ﬁshing season, since vessels can
choose when to ﬁsh, given the certainty of harvest right. Sykes (2010) observes, “Therein lies an
important characteristic of a credible rights-based
management framework—the notion of rights as
the currency of restructure and reallocation in
situations in which overﬁshing presents potential risk to stocks and to the communities dependent upon them.” There is also evidence that
individual harvesting rights can promote collective action and a custodial attitude among ﬁshers (Scott 1993, 2000a, 2000b). ITQs can lower
variable and ﬁxed-harvest costs. ITQs can also
lead to an increase in ex-vessel price and revenue
through changes in product form to higher-quality
and higher-valued products and distribute catches
more evenly throughout a potentially lengthened
ﬁshing season, as in the British Columbia halibut
ﬁshery (Grafton et al. 2000).
ITQs, as a form of private use rights over
the catch or ﬂow from the resource stock, are
suitable for some ﬁsheries, but not all, and their
applicability can be based on a case-by-case
basis, depending on the conditions at hand (Copes
1986, Squires et al. 1995, 1998, NRC 1999b,
Christy 2000, Hannesson 2004, World Bank
2004, Sanchirico et al. 2006). ITQs, for example,
are most applicable in ﬁsheries without complex
multiple species, comparatively stable ﬁsh stocks
and TACs, sufﬁcient scientiﬁc capability to
calculate TACs, the capability for monitoring
catches and enforcing compliance (particularly
since production is at sea), and laws protecting
private property in the society (i.e., strength of
title or security). ITQs have almost always been
distributed gratis to ﬁshers, based on historical
catches rather than through auction, which allows
the resource rent to be retained by ﬁshers.
ITQs do not fully capture all components of
total economic value and address public goods externalities associated with ecosystems and their
services and maintenance of biodiversity. ITQs
capture primarily commercially derived use values, that is, the value to the commercial ﬁshing industry and consumers. ITQs do not capture

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

indirect use values, such as economic values from
ecosystem services (which does not entail direct
use of the resource stock), and existence value derived from the continued existence of biodiversity.
In principle, the public or environmental groups
could purchase ITQs, and similar rights can be established over bycatch, habitat, protected species,
and some metric of biodiversity.
ITQS do not remove all economic inefﬁciencies that may arise (Scott 1988a, 1988b, 2000b,
Christy 2000). For example, “race to ﬁsh” incentives can remain when the unit cost of ﬁshing increases within a season or for the most accessible
and desirable ﬁshing grounds due to the patchiness of ﬁsh distribution. Fishers may face an incentive to harvest in a spatially uneconomical way
as they attempt to intercept migratory species before their competitors can. Discards of ﬁsh caught
in excess of a quota held are possible if the ITQ
exceeds the ﬂow from the resource stock, that
is, the catch, rather than the stock itself (Scott
1988a, 1988b). Discards create problems in multispecies ﬁsheries managed by ITQs because the
quotas for some species are reached before those
for other species (Squires et al. 1998, Sanchirico
et al. 2006). “High-grading,” that is, the discarding of marketable, but lower-valued, ﬁsh may occur if and when higher-valued marketable ﬁsh are
caught and the quota applies to both species or
the carrying capacity of the boat is reached. ITQs
do not address the bycatch problem, nor do they
cover all relevant elements of the ecosystem and
maintenance of biodiversity.
Sometimes a distinction is made between an individual vessel quota or individual ﬁshing quota,
on the one hand, and ITQs on the other. In the
former, transferability is not allowed, and sometimes security of title is more circumscribed and
the duration of the right is less. Without transferability, distinguishing the value of the quota from
the value of the vessel, that is, the portions of the
economic rent capitalized into each asset, becomes
difﬁcult.
Dolphin mortality limits (DMLs) are related to
ITQs and are the only catch right—in this case a
bycatch right—allocated to individuals in transna-

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

55

tional tuna ﬁsheries (Allen et al. 2008). DMLs
allow a vessel to catch yellowﬁn tuna associated
with dolphins in the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean and
the right to a speciﬁed amount of dolphin bycatch
mortality in the process. DMLs arise out of the
Agreement for the International Dolphin Conservation Program (AIDCP) and its predecessor, the
“La Jolla Agreement.” These have allocated annual DMLs to individual vessels since 1992. The
overall DMLs are divided equally among all vessels that seek individual vessel DMLs. The DML
is a relatively weak right because exclusivity is
not complete (there are national mortality limits,
which, when reached, curtail individual rights), it
has a maximum duration of one year, security is
attenuated by the individual holder’s government’s
ability to reallocate DMLs among vessels of its
ﬂeet, and transferability, in that vessels changing
ﬂags retain their DMLs and their records of dolphin mortality during the year to date, and that
their obligations under the AIDCP are enforced by
their new ﬂag. Limited transferability of the DMLs
among vessels is allowed, in that limits from vessels that renounce or forfeit their assigned limits
are redistributed among other vessels. In practice,
the parties to the AIDCP have also allowed ad hoc
transfers among vessels.

Individual Transferable Effort
Individual transferable effort (ITE) quotas establish a transferable use right in ﬁshing effort, typically denominated in days at sea or number of sets
of gear, although other units, for example, units of
gear, such as hooks or traps, can be used. ITE programs are conceived as private use rights, although
commonly held rights are not out of the question.
Ownership of the ﬁsh stocks and access is retained
by the state or international body established by a
binding international treaty. Compliance can come
through vessel monitoring systems (VMS; electronic means to track vessel movements) and/or
on-board observers. ITE programs are not nearly
as widespread as ITQ programs, although there are
ITE programs in the New England groundﬁsh ﬁshery, a system of tradable ﬁshing days in the Faeroe

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

56

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

Islands, the Hawaiian pelagic shallow-set longline ﬁshery for swordﬁsh, the Falkland/Malvinas
Islands squid ﬁshery, the Basque trawl ﬁshery, two
individual transferable trap programs in Florida,
the Forum Fisheries Agency states for harvests
of tunas in their EEZs in the western and central
Paciﬁc Ocean (denominated in days), ﬂeet capacity in Sweden, and transferable ﬁshing days in
Spain.14
Exclusive use is provided for the units of effort held. ITEs can be freely transferable, as in
the Hawaiian program. Duration can range from
limited periods of time to perpetuity, with a single
year’s duration for the Hawaiian program. Divisibility can be ﬁnely structured down to a single
day or unit of gear. Quality of title and security are
similar to those of ITQs.
ITEs represent a major step forward from open
access and limited entry and are a better structured
right than either, due in particular to the stronger
exclusive use by individual vessels. Transferability of days at sea can reduce overcapacity and
restructure industry to more closely align with a
proﬁtable ﬁshery.
Nonetheless, no matter how secure the title, exclusive and transferable ITEs suffer in that they
are deﬁned in terms of an ill-deﬁned input, ﬁshing effort, rather than catch. Fishing effort is a
composite of all economic inputs (in fact, it is
simply an intellectual construct), and measurement by a proxy variable, days at sea, gives an
incomplete and biased measure. Moreover, there
is not a unique relationship between a unit of effort measured as a day and the resulting ﬁshing
capacity and catch in that a day at sea gives ﬁshers an incentive to increase the use of economic
inputs not speciﬁed by the unit of effort. Without care in crafting the program, a day held by a
smaller and older vessel can differ markedly from
a day held by a larger and newer vessel that embodies more advanced technology. Transshipment
is also an issue, since vessels that can transfer their
catches at sea to freezer vessels have an advantage
over vessels that must travel to a port to unload
their catches. Continued productivity growth, including technical progress, also means that each

day of ﬁshing, although denominated in nominal
days or units of gear, is more productive each year.
Because the relationship between effort and catch
is both nonlinear and stochastic, ITEs are subject
to random events, such as luck and environmental changes that were not necessarily considered
when calculating the overall ITE.
ITEs may be useful when input-based management is preferred, as in complex multispecies
ﬁsheries for which multiple species greatly complicate ITQ programs, which are necessarily denominated in catches of species or species assemblages (Squires et al. 1995, 1998, Sanchirico et al.
2006). ITEs might also be useful in short-lived
ﬁsh stocks, such as squid and some small pelagic
species, for which the abundance is highly variable
and nonlinear and stochastic relationships between
effort and catch are par for the course. ITEs may
also be useful when the infrastructure necessary
to enforce use rights over catches is insufﬁcient
or nonexistent. (Establishment of adequate infrastructure is not a trivial matter, as monitoring is
often necessary not only at the ports of landing,
but also after the ﬁsh are landed, when they are
transported and traded.) Developments in VMS
facilitate the use of ITEs (and in some instances
territorial rights). Bycatches may pose less of an
issue, since there are no catch limits included
in ITEs (although there could be both ITEs and
bycatch limits).

Community Quotas
Community quotas are a form of common use
rights. Exclusive ﬁshing rights are allocated to
well-deﬁned communities or groups, rather than
to individuals. The right can be deﬁned as a share
of a TAC or to a speciﬁc geographic area. (In
the latter case, they would effectively become a
TURF owned by the community.) The community
decides how to ﬁsh its share. Community quotas
can also be viewed as a form of collective action
and as a form of common property or use right.
Ten percent of the catches of Bering Sea groundﬁsh stocks have been allocated to native Alaskan
villages in a program of community development

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

quotas allocated as part of ITQ programs (NRC
1999a, Willman 2000). Community quotas are often used to formalize traditional access rights in
small-scale ﬁsheries (OECD 2006). Community
quotas can provide a high degree of exclusivity,
divisibility, and ﬂexibility.
Ostrom (1990), Baland and Platteau (1996), and
others have shown that common property gives an
economically efﬁcient resource allocation if the
group management is effective, and an economic
optimum comparable to individual private property such as ITQs. To the extent that the common
property internalizes spatially related externalities
and spatially related ecosystem services and maintenance of biodiversity, then the economic optimum addresses public goods externalities in addition to the common resource stock externality, and
can outperform individual private property. These
potential gains from incorporating public good and
spatial margins of the common resource stock externalities must be tempered by the increases in
transactions costs internal to the community associated with common property.

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

57

the RFMO. The latter arrangement corresponds
to the IATTC AIDCP or to its closed regional
vessel register. States, in turn, could allocate use
rights—access, effort, or harvest—of various durations, transferability, exclusiveness, and divisibility to either individuals or groups. States could
even trade their use rights among one another. Or,
states could simply leave the EEZ in open access,
with all that entails.

Hybrid Rights
Hybrid rights, or overlapping systems of rights,
are those that are composed of more than one type
of right and may combine property rights with
use rights, such as state property and individual
use rights. In ﬁsheries, many rights are of such
a form. Other hybrid forms are possible, such as
Maine’s lobster ﬁshery, which is a hybrid of state
property with unofﬁcial ownership by the community, rather than by individuals (Acheson 1975).
The overlap of the de facto, rather than de jure,
common property with a spatial delineation also
introduces the element of a TURF.

State Property
The extension of the EEZs to 200 miles and the
territorial seas to 12 miles was the last widespread,
major transformation of property rights in the
oceans, and was a spatial extension of state property (Hollick 1977, Juda 1996). Further extension
of the EEZs to pick up straddling stocks or uncovered areas, such as the “doughnut hole” in the
Bering Sea, or even the high seas, is another possibility, but that would undoubtedly require a major
United Nations convention (Bjørndal and Munro
2003, Munro et al. 2004).
A second potential extension of state rights
would be the allocation of TACs (i.e., ﬂows from
the resource stocks) for tunas to the coastal states
and distant-water ﬁshing nations. Such rights
could be property if the right is so deﬁned, comparable to the EEZs, and would likely be tied to allocation and state property in the resource stocks.
State rights could alternatively be a use right of
some duration, with common property retained by

Concluding Remarks
More comprehensive and better-deﬁned property
and use rights are steadily emerging to address
the economic and ecological inefﬁciencies found
with common ocean resources as the beneﬁts of
this institutional change increasingly outweigh the
costs. Overcapacity, overﬁshing, and dissipation of
economic rent are the well-known manifestations
of these inefﬁciencies or costs.
Rights-based management addressing the common resource externality generally does not fully
address the externalities arising from the decline
in public goods of maintenance of biodiversity
and ecosystems and their services, or conversely
the rise of public bads of loss of biodiversity and
ecosystem degradation. Due to the problems of
clearly deﬁning the nature of the costs and beneﬁts, who pays and who beneﬁts, and investment in

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

58

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

and provision of these public goods, the contracting problem over this growing issue is unlikely to
be resolved in the near future.
Various forms of individual and group rights
have emerged, and are still forming, for marine
common resources and public goods. Many different forms of property right institutions have
emerged, which vary in their properties and most
notably as forms of individual or group rights and
over individual species or space and ecosystems.
These different forms of rights emerge in response
to the biological nature of the resource and ecosystem and the current technology of the production
process, exclusion, and enforcement, but also as
rights are determined through the political process, which, in turn, shapes the timing and form
of the rights that develop. Time and precedent also
play important roles in determining the range of
feasible contracting outcomes, that is, a path dependency (Libecap 1989).
Individual rights tend to be species speciﬁc, and
as such tend not to internalize all margins of the
common resource stock externality, most notably
spatial dimensions, and public good externalities,
most notably ecosystems and their services and
maintenance of biodiversity. Group rights for ﬁshing rights include a spatial dimension, at least
implicitly, in which case some, but not all, of
the remaining common resource externality and
public goods externality are internalized. Group
rights suffer from growing transactions and information costs, and hence contracting costs, as the
size and heterogeneity of the group increases and
the more complex is the ecosystem. Group rights
under certain conditions can provide an outcome
as efﬁcient as individual rights, as emphasized by
Ostrom (1990) and Baland and Platteau (1996).
Rights-based management for transboundary
common resources and public goods faces even
greater complexity than for those falling solely
within the EEZs of individual states. Rights in
the transnational setting are only just now beginning to develop, albeit in a somewhat tenuous and often rudimentary form, and address not
only the common resource and public good externalities but the transboundary externality. As

both the potential costs and beneﬁts of property
and use rights grow in the transnational settings,
rights-based management can be expected to grow
and strengthen in tandem. Rights in these settings
will likely retain some form of state involvement
and mediation. Property rights institutions are determined through the political process entailing
negotiations among states and among the parties
within each state. The political process of deﬁning and enforcing emerging transnational property
rights can be divisive because of the distributional
implications of different property allocations, both
among states and among the parties within each
state (Libecap 1989). The aggregate gains of a
transformation to stronger property and use rights
over transnational common resources and public
goods are increasingly self-evident, but the distribution of wealth and political power entailed
by the transformation will be a source of considerable controversy and dispute. At the heart of
this contracting problem will be devising politically acceptable allocation mechanisms to assign
the gains from institutional change while maintaining production advantages and compensating
those potentially harmed. Perfectly compensating
side payments facilitating agreement may also
face formidable problems in reaching a political consensus.15 These bargaining problems over
deﬁning and assigning the rights, related side payments, and enforcing property claims determine
the nature of the property rights agreements that
ultimately emerge (Libecap 1989). Contracting
for property rights over transnational common resources and public goods will face considerable
challenges in the future.

Endnotes
1. Latin legal names are given in parentheses.
These were originally suggested by Chris Stone
and initially appeared in Grafton et al. (2000).
2. Libecap (2006: 8) states, “First-possession
is the dominant method of establishing property
rights. It assigns ownership on a ﬁrst-come, ﬁrstserved basis or ﬁrst-in-time, ﬁrst-in-right. . . . But

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

the rule-of-capture grants ownership to the ﬂow
and not generally to the resource stock, and hence
in the presence of open-access conditions, it can
exacerbate competitive extraction incentives.”
3. Baland and Platteau (2005) observed that, for
example, common property management implies
collective regulations regarding both membership
and the way to use the resource, and the existence
of monitoring and sanctioning procedures so that
those rules can be effectively enforced.
4. Baland and Platteau (2005: 9) further observed that “. . . the problem with resources under open access or under community ownership limited to membership rules—what Baland
and Platteau (1996) call ‘unregulated common
property’—is the fact that externalities are not
properly internalised. If there were no transaction
costs, ‘regulated common property’ (i.e., collective ownership with both membership rules and
rules of use) would be equivalent to private (and
state) ownership. Yet, the presence of pervasive
transaction costs in real world situations tilts the
balance in favour of private ownership: as a matter
of fact, being under the control of a single person,
private ownership avoids all kinds of negotiation
costs necessary to reach a collective agreement as
well as all the governance costs that have to be
incurred with a view to monitoring and enforcing
such agreements.”
5. Libecap (1989) observed that because of
the overwhelming advantages of secure property
rights, economic agents may adopt or modify
property rights to mitigate the losses of common
resources as soon as the beneﬁts outweigh the
costs. These costs include not only any direct costs
associated with the new property rights arrangement, but the costs associated with the next-best
alternative, that is, the opportunity cost. A major factor in the emergence of new ownership arrangements is the distributional conﬂicts and their
resolution.
6. Comanagement reshapes “. . . the state interventions so as to institutionalize collaboration between administration and resource users and end
those unproductive situations where they are pitted against one another as antagonistic actors in

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

59

the process of resource regulation” (Baland and
Platteau 1996: 347).
7. In this regard, ITQs can be seen as resembling
grazing rights on public land, as opposed to ownership of the grazing land itself, which, instead,
is retained by the state (Libecap 2010). Similarly,
under the appropriative rights system, individuals
were granted usufructory or possessory rights to
water, rather than fee simple title.
8. Libecap (2010) discusses comparable reasons for terrestrial resources.
9. Moral hazard refers to a problem of asymmetric information whereby the actions of one
party to a transaction are unobservable. It refers to
the possibility that the redistribution of risk (such
as that which transfers risk from the insured to the
insurer) changes people’s behavior. Moral hazard
arises after a contract. For example, holders of insurance premiums without deductions or penalties
are more likely to undertake actions that are less
careful toward loss than if deductions or penalties
are required. This information problem arises because the ﬁshery manager does not have complete
information about all variables relevant for regulation. Hence, the regulator cannot easily and at
low cost monitor ﬁsher behavior.
10. See Pinkerton (1989), Baland and Platteau
(1996), and Jentoft (2003) for extensive discussions.
11. Baland and Platteau (2005) emphasize governance (transactions) costs, the size of the user
group, income or wealth inequality, and availability of exit opportunities.
12. Baland and Platteau (1996: 175), when
discussing common property, state, “Indeed, if
(1) information is perfect, and (2) there are no
transaction costs, regulated common property and
private property are equivalent from the standpoint of the efﬁciency of resource use . . . . Both
the above property regimes can therefore support
a Pareto-optimal equilibrium.”
13. Baland and Platteau (1996: 287–288) observe that several factors are more favorable
for success: the smaller the number of users;
the more clearly deﬁned the boundaries of the
group; the more powerful are those subgroups

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

60

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

who beneﬁt from retaining the commons and the
weaker are those who favor subgroup enclosure or
private property; the better developed are existing arrangements among users for discussion of
common problems; the extent to which users are
bound by mutual obligations and the more concerned people are about their social reputations
and punishments against rule-breaking; and the
more the users already have joint rules for purposes other than common resource use and the
more bite behind the rules.
14. Nontransferable individual effort quotas are
rights attached to a quantity of ﬁshing effort that
can be deployed over some period of time (OECD
2006). They tend to be used in ﬁsheries for sedentary species, and are characterized by moderate or
relatively high levels of exclusive use, duration,
and quality of title. They are used in Belgium and
Iceland, where they are speciﬁed as allowable ﬁshing days, in Australia, Canada, France, the United
Kingdom, and the United States for crab and lobster ﬁsheries, where they are speciﬁed as limited
numbers of pots or traps, and in France for the
scallop ﬁshery, where they are speciﬁed as limited
numbers of hours per ﬁshing day.
15. Libecap (1989) observed that the transfers
entailed by side payments can become an assignment of rights in themselves, and that the side payment schemes reached through the political process may be insufﬁciently complete to resolve the
distributional conﬂicts needed for more than minimal institutional change or may fail to compensate
all relevant parties.

References
Acheson JM. 1975. The lobster ﬁefs: economic and ecological effects of territoriality in
the marine lobster industry. Human Ecology,
3(3):183–207.
Akimichi T. 1984. Territorial regulation in the
small scale ﬁsheries of Itoman, Okinawa. In
Ruddle K and T Akimichi (eds) Maritime Institutions in the Western Pacific. Senri Ethno-

logical Studies, No. 17. Osaka, Japan: National
Museum of Ethnology, pp. 89–120.
Alexander P. 1980. Sea tenure in southern
Sri Lanka. In Spoehr A (ed.) Maritime
Adaptations—Essays on Contemporary Fishing Communities. Pittsburgh, PA: University of
Pittsburgh Press, pp. 91–111.
Alexander P. 1982. Sri Lankan Fishermen—Rural
Capitalism and Peasant Society. Monographs
on S. Asia, No. 7. Canberra: Australian National
University.
Allen R, J Joseph, and D Squires. 2008. Paper entitled Workshop on Rights-based Management
and Buybacks in International Tuna Fisheries.
University of California at San Diego, May 5–9,
2008 (http://www.iattc.org/PDFFiles2/AllenJoseph-and-Squires.pdf).
Asada Y, Y Hirasawa, and F Nagasaki. 1983. Fishery management in Japan. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 238, 26 pp.
Aswani S. 2006. Customary sea tenure in Oceania
as a case of rights-based management: does it
work? Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries,
15(3):285–307.
Baland J-M and J-P Platteau. 1996. Halting
Degradation of Natural Resources: Is There
a Role for Rural Communities? Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 440 pp.
Baland J-M and J-P Platteau. 2005. Economics
of common property management regimes. In
Mäler KG and J Vincent (eds) Handbook of
Environmental Economics, 1st edn, Vol. 3. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier Science.
Barrett S. 2003. Environment and Statecraft:
The Strategy of Environmental Treaty Making. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
446 pp.
Barrett S. 2005. The theory of international environmental agreements. In Mäler KG and
JR Vincent (eds) Handbook of Environmental Economics, 1st edn, Vol. 3. Amsterdam,
the Netherlands: Elsevier Science, pp. 1457–
1516.
Baumol WJ and WE Oates. 1988. The Theory
of Environmental Policy, 2nd edn. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 299 pp.

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

Bernal PA, D Olivia, B Aliaga, and C Morales.
1999. New regulations in Chilean ﬁsheries
and aquaculture: ITQ’s and territorial users
rights. Ocean and Coastal Management,
42(2–4):119–142.
Bjørndal T and GR Munro. 2003. The management of high seas ﬁsheries resources and the implementation of the UN Fish Stocks Agreement
of 1995. In Folmer H and T Tietenberg (eds) The
International Yearbook of Environmental and
Resource Economics 2003/2004. Cheltenham,
UK: Edward Elgar, pp. 1–30.
Branch TA, R Hilborn, AC Haynie, G Fay, L
Flynn, J Grifﬁths, KN Marshall, JK Randall,
JM Scheuerell, EJ Ward, and M Young.
2006. Fleet dynamics and ﬁshermen behavior:
lessons for ﬁsheries managers. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 63(7):
1647–1668.
Bromley D. 1991. Environment and Economy:
Property Rights and Public Policy. Oxford, UK:
Blackwell Publishing, 250 pp.
Cancino JP, H Uchida, and JE Wilen. 2007.
TURFS and ITQs: collective vs. individual decision making. Marine Resource Economics,
22(4):391–406.
Cheung SNS. 1970. The structure of a contract and
the theory of a non-exclusive resource. Journal
of Law and Economics, 13(1):49–70.
Christy FT, Jr. 1973. Fisherman Quotas: A Tentative Suggestion for Domestic Management.
Kingston, RI: Law of the Sea Institute, University of Rhode Island. Occasional Paper, No.
19.
Christy FT, Jr. 1983. Territorial use rights in marine ﬁsheries: deﬁnitions and conditions. FAO
Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 227, 10 pp.
Christy FT, Jr. 2000. Common property rights:
an alternative to ITQs. FAO Fisheries Technical
Paper, No. 404/1, pp. 118–135.
Cinner J. 2005. Socio-economic factors inﬂuencing customary marine tenure in the Indo-Paciﬁc.
Ecology and Society, 10(1):36–49.
Cinner J and S Awani. 2007. Integrating customary
management into marine conservation. Biological Conservation, 140(3–4):201–216.

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

61

Cinner J and T McClanachan. 2006. Socioeconomical factors that lead to overﬁshing in smallscale coral reef ﬁsheries of Papua New Guinea.
Environmental Conservation, 33(1):73–80.
Coase R. 1937. The nature of the ﬁrm. Economica,
4(16):386–405.
Coase R. 1960. The problem of social cost. Journal
of Law and Economics, 3(1):1–44.
Cooter RB and T Ulen. 2004. Law and Economics,
4th edn. New York: Addison-Wesley, 560 pp.
Copes P. 1986. A critical review of the individual quota as a device on ﬁsheries management.
Land Economics, 62(3):278–291.
De Meza D and JR Gould. 1992. The social efﬁciency of private decisions to enforce
property rights. Journal of Political Economy,
100(3):561–580.
Gonzalez E. 1996. Territorial use rights in
Chilean ﬁsheries. Marine Resource Economics,
11(3):211–218.
González J, W Stotz, J Garrido, J Orensanz,
A Parma, C Tapia, and A Zuleta. 2006. The
Chilean TURF system: how is it performing in
the case of the loco ﬁshery? Bulletin of Marine
Science, 78(3):499–527.
Gordon HS. 1954. The economic theory of a
common property resource. Journal of Political Economy, 62(2):124–142.
Grafton RQ, W Adamowica, D Dupont, H Nelson,
RJ Hill, and S Renzetti. 2004. The Economics
of the Environment and Natural Resources.
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 520 pp.
Grafton RQ, R Arnason, T Bjørndal, D Campbell, HF Campbell, CW Clark, R Connor, DP
Dupont, R Hannesson, R Hilborn, JE Kirkley,
T Kompas, DE Lane, GR Munro, S Pascoe,
D Squires, SI Steinshamn, BR Turris, and Q
Weninger. 2006. Incentive-based approaches to
sustainable ﬁsheries. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 63(3):699–710.
Grafton RQ, D Squires, and KJ Fox. 2000. Private
property and economic efﬁciency: a study of
a common-pool resource. Journal of Law and
Economics, 43(2):679–713.
Hannesson R. 2004. The Privatization of the
Oceans. Cambridge: MIT Press, 212 pp.

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

62

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

Hannesson R. 2005. The privatization of the
oceans. In Leal DR (ed.) Evolving Property
Rights in Marine Fisheries. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld, pp. 25–48.
Hilborn R, JM Orensanz, and A Parma. 2005. Institutions, incentives and the future of ﬁsheries.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B—Biological Sciences,
360:47–57.
Hollick A. 1977. The origins of 200-mile offshore
zones. American Journal of International Law,
71(3):494–500.
Homans FR and JE Wilen. 1997. A model of
regulated open access resource use. Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management,
32(1):1–21.
Huppert DD. 2005. An overview of ﬁshing rights.
Reviews in Fisheries Biology and Fisheries,
15(3):201–215.
Jensen F and N Vestergaard. 2002. A
principal-agent analysis of ﬁsheries. Journal
of Institutional and Theoretical Economics,
158(2):276–285.
Jentoft S. 2003. Co-management—the way forward. In Wilson DG, J Raakjaer, and PD Nielson
(eds). The Fisheries Co-management Experience: Accomplishments, Challenges and
Prospects. Denmark: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Jentoft S and TI Kristoffersen. 1989. Fishermen’s
co-management: the case of the Lofoten ﬁshery.
Human Organization, 48(4):355–365.
Johannes RE. 1978. Traditional marine conservation methods in Oceania and their demise.
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics,
9:349–364.
Johannes RE. 1988. The role of marine resource
tenure systems (TURFs) in sustainable near
shore marine resource development and management in US afﬁliated tropical Paciﬁc islands. In Smith BD (ed.) Topic Reviews in Insular Resource Development and Management
in the Pacific US-Affiliated Islands. University
of Guam Marine Laboratory, Technical Report,
No. 88, pp. 1–28.

Johannes RE. 2002. The renaissance of
community-based marine resource management in Oceania. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics, 33:317–340.
Johnson RN and GD Libecap. 1982. Contracting
problems and regulation: the case of the ﬁshery. American Economic Review, 72(5):1005–
1022.
Juda L. 1996. International Law and Ocean Use
Management: The Evolution of Ocean Governance. London: Routledge, 345 pp.
Kitts AW and SF Edwards. 2003. Cooperatives in
US ﬁsheries: realizing the potential of the ﬁshermen’s collective marketing act. Marine Policy,
27(5):357–366.
Libecap GD. 1989. Contracting for Property
Rights. New York: Cambridge University Press,
142 pp.
Libecap GD. 2006. Assigning property rights in
the common pool: implications of the prevalence of ﬁrst-possession rules. Paper prepared
for Sharing the Fish 06 Conference, February
26–March 2, 2006, Fremantle, Perth, Western
Australia.
Libecap GD. 2010. Rights-based management of
tuna ﬁsheries: lessons from the assignment of
property rights on the western U.S. frontier.
Chapter 8 of this volume.
Munro GR, A Van Houtte, and R Willman. 2004.
The conservation and management of shared
ﬁsh stocks: legal and economic aspects. FAO
Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 465, 69 pp.
National Research Council. 1999a. The Community Development Quota Program in Alaska.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 215
pp.
National Research Council. 1999b. Sharing the
Fish: Toward a National Policy on Individual Fishing Quotas. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press, 436 pp.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development). 2006. Using Market Mechanisms to Manage Fisheries: Smoothing the Path.
Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, 327 pp.

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

3

Ostrom E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The
Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 298 pp.
Pinkerton E (ed.) 1989. Co-operative Management of Local Fisheries: New Directions for
Improved Management and Community Development. Vancouver: University of British
Columbia Press, 299 pp.
Pinto da Silva P and A Kitts. 2006. Collaborative ﬁsheries management in the northeast U.S.:
emerging initiatives and future directions. Marine Policy, 30(6):832–841.
Ruddle K. 1987. Administrative and conﬂict management in Japanese coastal ﬁsheries. FAO
Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 273, 93 pp.
Ruddle K and T Akimichi (eds). 1984. Maritime
Institutions in the Western Paciﬁc. Senri Ethnological Studies, No. 17. Osaka, Japan: National
Museum of Ethnology, 329 pp.
Salvanes K and D Squires. 1995. Transferable
quotas, enforcement costs and typical ﬁrms: an
empirical application to the Norwegian trawler
ﬂeet. Environmental and Resource Economics,
6(1):1–21.
Sanchirico J, D Holland, K Quigley, and M
Fina. 2006. Catch-quota balancing in multispecies individual ﬁshing quotas. Marine Policy, 30(6):767–785.
Scott A. 1988a. Conceptual origins of rights based
ﬁshing. In Neher P, R Arnason, and N Mollett
(eds). Rights Based Fishing. Dordrecht, the
Netherlands: Kluwer Press, pp. 11–38.
Scott A. 1988b. Development of property in
the ﬁshery. Marine Resource Economics, 5(4):
289–311.
Scott A. 1993. Obstacles to ﬁshery selfgovernment. Marine Resource Economics, 8(3):
187–199.
Scott A. 2000a. Introducing property in ﬁshery
management. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper,
No. 404/1, pp. 1–13.
Scott A. 2000b. Moving through the narrows:
from open-access to ITQs and self-government.
FAO Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 404/1,
pp. 105–117.

Property and Use Rights in Fisheries

63

Seabright P. 1997. Is co-operation habit forming?
In Dasgupta P and K-G Mäler (eds) The Environment and Emerging Development Issues,
Vol. 2. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Segerson K and TJ Miceli. 1998. Voluntary agreements: good or bad news for environmental protection? Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management, 36(2):109–130.
Spagnolo M and R Sabatella. 2007. Driftnets
buyback program: a case of institutional failure. In Curtis R and D Squires (eds) Fisheries
Buybacks. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing,
pp. 145–156.
Squires D, H Campbell, S Cunningham, C
DeWees, RQ Grafton, SF Herrick, J Kirkley,
S Pascoe, K Salvanes, B Shallard, B Turris,
and N Vestergaard. 1998. Individual transferable quotas in multispecies ﬁsheries. Marine
Policy, 22(2):135–159.
Squires D, O Ishak, Y Jeon, J Kirkley, K Kuperan, and I Susilowati. 2003. Excess capacity and sustainable development in Java Sea
ﬁsheries. Environment and Development Economics, 8(1):105–127.
Squires D, J Kirkley, and CA Tisdell. 1995. Individual transferable quotas as a ﬁsheries management tool. Reviews in Fisheries Science,
3(2):141–169.
Sullivan J. 2000. Harvesting cooperatives and U.S.
antitrust law: recent developments and implications. Proceedings of the Tenth Biennial Conference of the International Institute of Fisheries Economics and Trade, Corvallis, OR, July
10–14.
Sykes DR. 2010. Can rights put it right? Industry
initiatives to resolve overcapacity issues: observations from a boat deck and a manager’s desk.
Chapter 7 of this volume.
Townsend RE. 1990. Entry restrictions in the ﬁshery: a survey of the evidence. Land Economics,
66(4):359–378.
Townsend RE. 2005. Producer organizations and
agreements in ﬁsheries: integrating regulation
and Coasian bargaining. In Leal DR (ed.)
Evolving Property Rights in Marine Fisheries.

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

lOMoARcPSD|18763363

64

Part I

Introduction to Transnational Fisheries Management

Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁeld,
pp. 195–202.
Wade R. 1987. The management of common
property resources: ﬁnding a cooperative solution. World Bank Research Observer, 2(2):219–
234.
Warming J. 1911. Om Grundrente av Fiskegrunde.
Nationaløkonomisk
Tidsskrift,
49:499–
505.
Wilen J. 1988. Limited entry licensing: a retrospective assessment. Marine Resource Economics, 5(4):313–324.

Willmann R. 2000. Group and community-based
ﬁshing rights. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper,
No. 404/1, pp. 51–57.
World Bank. 2004. Saving Fish and Fishers: Towards Sustainable and Equitable Governance of
the Global Fishing Sector. Report No. 29090GLB. Washington, DC: Agriculture and Rural
Development Department.
Yamamoto T. 1995. Development of a
community-based
ﬁshery
management
system in Japan. Marine Resource Economics,
10(1):21–34.

Downloaded by Jun Ha (juha@ucsd.edu)

