See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/26706759

Rebuilding Global Fisheries
Article in Science · August 2009
DOI: 10.1126/science.1173146 · Source: PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

1,847

13,138

21 authors, including:
Boris Worm

Ray Hilborn

Dalhousie University

University of Washington Seattle

211 PUBLICATIONS 35,636 CITATIONS

506 PUBLICATIONS 40,944 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Julia K Baum

Trevor A. Branch

University of Victoria

University of Washington Seattle

160 PUBLICATIONS 13,499 CITATIONS

181 PUBLICATIONS 10,117 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Integrated Marine Observing System View project

PhD - the future of seafood production View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Jeffrey A Hutchings on 20 May 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Rebuilding Global Fisheries
Boris Worm, et al.
Science 325, 578 (2009);
DOI: 10.1126/science.1173146

The following resources related to this article are available online at
www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of July 30, 2009 ):
Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online
version of this article at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/325/5940/578
Supporting Online Material can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/325/5940/578/DC1

This article appears in the following subject collections:
Ecology
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/ecology
Information about obtaining reprints of this article or about obtaining permission to reproduce
this article in whole or in part can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/about/permissions.dtl

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright
2009 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a
registered trademark of AAAS.

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

This article cites 36 articles, 14 of which can be accessed for free:
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/325/5940/578#otherarticles

Rebuilding Global Fisheries
Boris Worm,1* Ray Hilborn,2* Julia K. Baum,3 Trevor A. Branch,2 Jeremy S. Collie,4
Christopher Costello,5 Michael J. Fogarty,6 Elizabeth A. Fulton,7 Jeffrey A. Hutchings,1
Simon Jennings,8,9 Olaf P. Jensen,2 Heike K. Lotze,1 Pamela M. Mace,10 Tim R. McClanahan,11
Cóilín Minto,1 Stephen R. Palumbi,12 Ana M. Parma,13 Daniel Ricard,1 Andrew A. Rosenberg,14
Reg Watson,15 Dirk Zeller15
After a long history of overexploitation, increasing efforts to restore marine ecosystems and rebuild
fisheries are under way. Here, we analyze current trends from a fisheries and conservation
perspective. In 5 of 10 well-studied ecosystems, the average exploitation rate has recently declined
and is now at or below the rate predicted to achieve maximum sustainable yield for seven systems.
Yet 63% of assessed fish stocks worldwide still require rebuilding, and even lower exploitation
rates are needed to reverse the collapse of vulnerable species. Combined fisheries and conservation
objectives can be achieved by merging diverse management actions, including catch restrictions,
gear modification, and closed areas, depending on local context. Impacts of international fleets
and the lack of alternatives to fishing complicate prospects for rebuilding fisheries in many poorer
regions, highlighting the need for a global perspective on rebuilding marine resources.
verfishing has long been recognized as
a leading environmental and socioeconomic problem in the marine realm and
has reduced biodiversity and modified ecosystem
functioning (1–3). Yet, current trends as well as
future prospects for global fisheries remain controversial (3–5). Similarly, the solutions that hold
promise for restoring marine fisheries and the
ecosystems in which they are embedded are hotly
debated (4–6). Such controversies date back more
than a hundred years to the famous remarks of
Thomas Huxley on the inexhaustible nature of
sea fisheries (7) and various replies documenting
their ongoing exhaustion. Although management
authorities have since set goals for sustainable
use, progress toward curbing overfishing has been
hindered by an unwillingness or inability to bear
the short-term social and economic costs of reducing fishing (8). However, recent commitments

O

1

Biology Department, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H
4J1, Canada. 2School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195–5020, USA. 3Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, University of California-San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093–0202, USA. 4Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island, Narragansett, RI 02882,
USA. 5Donald Bren School of Environmental Science and
Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
93106–5131, USA. 6National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Woods Hole,
MA 02543, USA. 7Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (CSIRO) Marine and Atmospheric
Research, General Post Office Box 1538, Hobart, TAS 7001,
Australia. 8Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture
Science, Lowestoft NR33 0HT, UK. 9School of Environmental
Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.
10
Ministry of Fisheries, Post Office Box 1020, Wellington, New
Zealand. 11Wildlife Conservation Society Marine Programs,
Post Office Box 99470, Mombasa, Kenya. 12Hopkins Marine
Station, Stanford University, Pacific Grove, CA 93950, USA.
13
Centro Nacional Patagónico, 9120 Puerto Madryn, Argentina.
14
Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824–3525, USA.
15
Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
bworm@dal.ca (B.W.); rayh@u.washington.edu (R.H.)

578

to adopting an ecosystem approach to fisheries
may further influence progress because they have
led to a reevaluation of management targets for
fisheries and the role of managers in meeting
broader conservation objectives for the marine
environment (9).
In light of this debate, we strive here to join
previously diverging perspectives and to provide
an integrated assessment of the status, trends, and
solutions in marine fisheries. We explore the
prospects for rebuilding depleted marine fish
populations (stocks) and for restoring the ecosystems of which they are part. In an attempt to
unify our understanding of the global fisheries
situation, we compiled and analyzed all available
data types, namely global catch data (Fig. 1A),
scientific stock assessments, and research trawl
surveys (Fig. 1B), as well as data on small-scale
fisheries (10). We further used published ecosystem models (Fig. 1B) to evaluate the effects of
exploitation on marine communities. Available
data sources are organized hierarchically like a
Russian doll: Stock assessments provide the
finest resolution but represent only a subset of
species included in research surveys, which in
turn represent only a small subset of species
caught globally. These sources need to be interpreted further in light of historical fisheries before data collection and illegal or unreported
fisheries operating today (11). We focus on two
leading questions: (i) how do changes in exploitation rates impact fish populations, communities, and yields, and (ii) which solutions
have proven successful in rebuilding exploited
marine ecosystems?
Models. A range of models is available to
analyze the effects of changes in exploitation rate
on fish populations, communities, and ecosystems. Exploitation rate (ut) is defined as the proportion of biomass that is removed per year, i.e.,
ut ¼ Ct =Bt where C is the catch (or yield) and B
is the available biomass in year t. Single-species

31 JULY 2009

VOL 325

SCIENCE

models are often used to determine the exploitation rate uMSY that provides the maximum
sustainable yield (MSY) for a particular stock.
Fishing for MSY results in a stock biomass,
BMSY, that is substantially (typically 50 to 75%)
lower than the unfished biomass (B0). It has been
a traditional fisheries objective to achieve singlespecies MSY, and most management regimes
have been built around this framework. Recently
this focus has expanded toward assessing the
effects of exploitation on communities and ecosystems (9).
Multispecies models can be used to predict
the effects of exploitation on species composition, size structure, biomass, and other ecosystem
properties. They range from simpler community
models to more-complex ecosystem models (12).
Figure 2 displays equilibrium solutions from a
size-based community model, which assumes
that fishing pressure is spread across species
according to their size and that a subset of species
remains unfished (13). Results of more-complex
ecosystem models across 31 ecosystems and a
range of different fishing scenarios were remarkably similar (fig. S1 and table S1). With increasing exploitation rate, total fish catch is predicted
to increase toward the multispecies maximum
sustainable yield (MMSY) and decrease thereafter. In this example, the corresponding exploitation rate that gives maximum yield uMMSY is
~0.45, and total community biomass BMMSY
equilibrates at ~35% of unfished biomass (Fig. 2).
Overfishing occurs when u exceeds uMMSY, whereas
rebuilding requires reducing exploitation below
uMMSY. An increasing exploitation rate causes a
monotonic decline in total biomass and average
body size, and an increasing proportion of species is predicted to collapse (Fig. 2). We used 10%
of unfished biomass as a definition for collapse.
At such low abundance, recruitment may be
severely limited, and species may cease to play a
substantial ecological role. This model suggests
that a wide range of exploitation rates (0.25 < u <
0.6) yield ≥90% of maximum catch but with very
different ecosystem consequences: whereas at
u = 0.6 almost half of the species are predicted to
collapse, reducing exploitation rates to u = 0.25 is
predicted to rebuild total biomass, increase average body size, and strongly reduce species collapses with little loss in long-term yield (Fig. 2).
In addition to reconciling fishery and conservation objectives, setting exploitation rate below
uMMSY reduces the cost of fishing and increases
profit margins over the long term (14). This simple model does not incorporate fishing selectivity;
however, in practice the proportion of collapsed
species could be reduced further by increasing
selectivity through improved gear technology
(15), by closing areas frequented by vulnerable
species, or through offering incentives to improve
targeting practices (16). Such strategies allow
for protection of vulnerable or collapsed species,
while allowing for more intense exploitation of
others.

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

RESEARCH ARTICLES

RESEARCH ARTICLES

Fig. 1. Data sources
used to evaluate global
fisheries. (A) Global catch
data; colors refer to the
natural logarithm of the
average reported catch
(metric ton km−2 year−1)
from 1950 to 2004). (B)
Other data: Stock assessments quantify the status
of exploited populations;
research trawl surveys are
used to estimate fish community trends; ecosystem
models are used to assess
responses to fishing. Ecosystems that were analyzed in some detail are
highlighted in green (not
overfished), yellow (low
exploitation rate, biomass
rebuilding from overfishing), orange (low to moderate exploitation rate,
not yet rebuilding), or red
(high exploitation rate).

Up to the 1990s, assessed species in 6 of the
10 ecosystems had exploitation rates substantially higher than those predicted to produce MMSY
(Fig. 3A). Only the eastern Bering Sea has been
consistently managed below that threshold. Since
the 1990s, Iceland, Newfoundland-Labrador, the
Northeast U.S. Shelf, the Southeast Australian
Shelf, and California Current ecosystems have
shown substantial declines in fishing pressure
such that they are now at or below the modeled
uMMSY. However, only in the California Current and in New Zealand are current exploitation rates predicted to achieve a conservation
target of less than 10% of stocks collapsed (Fig.
3A). Declining exploitation rates have contributed to the rebuilding of some depleted stocks,
whereas others remain at low abundance. Averaged across all assessed species, biomass is still
well below BMSY in most regions. However,
biomass has recently been increasing above the
long-term average in Iceland, the Northeast
U.S. Shelf, and the California Current, while

remaining relatively stable or decreasing elsewhere (Fig. 3A).
Scientific stock assessments. Stock assessments quantify the population status (abundance,
length, and age structure) of targeted fish or
invertebrate stocks. We explored the status of 166
stocks worldwide for which we were able to
obtain estimates of current biomass and exploitation rate (Fig. 3B). For about two-thirds of the
examined stocks (63%), biomass (B) has dropped
below the traditional single-species management
target of MSY, that is, B < BMSY. About half of
those stocks (28% of total) have exploitation
rates that would allow for rebuilding to BMSY, that
is, u < uMSY, whereas overfishing continues in the
remainder (u > uMSY in 35% of all stocks).
Another 37% of assessed stocks have either not
fallen below BMSY or have recovered from
previous depletion; most stocks in this category
(77%) are in the Pacific. The weight of the
evidence, as shown by the kernel density plot in
Fig. 3B, indicates that most assessed stocks have

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

These results suggest that there is a range of
exploitation rates that achieve high yields and
maintain most species. To test whether current
fisheries fall within this range, we evaluated
trends in 10 large marine ecosystems for which
both ecosystem models and stock assessments
were available (10). Figure 3A shows exploitation rate and biomass trajectories derived from 4
to 20 assessed fish or invertebrate stocks per
ecosystem. These stocks typically represent most
of the catch, and we assumed that trends in their
exploitation rates represent the community as a
whole. Ecosystem models were used to calculate
uMMSY (light blue bars) and the exploitation rate
at which less than 10% of the fished species are
predicted to be collapsed (uconserve, dark blue bars).
Across the 10 examined ecosystems, MMSY was
predicted at multispecies exploitation rates of
uMMSY = 0.05 to 0.28 (mean of 0.16), whereas
avoiding 10% collapse rates required much lower
exploitation rates of uconserve = 0.02 to 0.05 (mean
of 0.04).

A

Ln(Catch)
>8
>6
>4
>2
>1
<0
< -1
< -3
< -4
< -5
< -6

B

=Ecosystem models
=Stock assessments
=Research surveys

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 325

31 JULY 2009

579

RESEARCH ARTICLES

580

The trawl surveys also revealed changes in
size structure that are consistent with model
predictions: average maximum size (Lmax)
declined by 22% since 1959 when all communities were included (Fig. 4M). However, there
were contrasting trends among our focal regions:
Lmax changed little in the eastern Bering Sea over
the surveyed time period (Fig. 4N), dropped
sharply in the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence,
eastern Canada (Fig. 4O), as large demersal
stocks collapsed, and increased because of rebuilding of large demersals (particularly haddock)
on Georges Bank, Northeast U.S. Shelf (Fig. 4P).
These trends included both target and nontarget
species and show how changes in exploitation
rates affect the broader community. Published
analyses of the Gulf of St. Lawrence and adjacent

areas in eastern Canada demonstrate that these
community shifts involved large changes in predation regimes, leading to ecological surprises
such as predator-prey reversals (19), trophic
cascades (17), and the projected local extinction
of formerly dominant species (20). Research on
the Georges Bank closed area (21) and in marine
protected areas worldwide (22) has shown how
some of these changes may reverse when predatory fish are allowed to recover. This reveals
top-down interactions cascading from fishers to
predators and their multiple prey species as important structuring forces that affect community
patterns of depletion and recovery (18).
Global fisheries catches. The benefits and
costs involved in rebuilding depleted fisheries are
demonstrated by an analysis of catch data. Global

MMSY

Overfishing

100

80

60

40

20

Total catch
Total biomass
Mean Lmax
Collapsed species

0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Exploitation rate
Maintaining
biodiversity

Maintaining
high catch

Maintaining
high employment

Fig. 2. Effects of increasing exploitation rate on a model fish community. Exploitation rate is the
proportion of available fish biomass caught in each year. Mean Lmax refers to the average
maximum length that species in the community can attain. Collapsed species are those for which
stock biomass has declined to less than 10% of their unfished biomass. This size-structured model
was parameterized for 19 target and 2 nontarget species in the Georges Bank fish community (13).
It includes size-dependent growth, maturation, predation, and fishing. Rebuilding can occur to the
left, overfishing to the right, of the point of maximum catch. Three key objectives that inform
current management are highlighted: biodiversity is maintained at low exploitation rate, maximum
catch is maintained at intermediate exploitation rate, and high employment is often maintained at
intermediate to high exploitation rate, because of the high fishing effort required.

31 JULY 2009

VOL 325

SCIENCE

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

Rebuilding

Percent of maximum

fallen below the biomass that supports maximum
yield (B < BMSY) but have the potential to
recover, where low exploitation rates (u < uMSY)
are maintained. Note that most stock assessments
come from intensely managed fisheries in
developed countries, and therefore our results
may not apply to stocks in many developing
countries, which are often not assessed but fished
at high exploitation rates and low biomass. Full
results are provided in table S2.
When we combined the biomass estimates
of stocks assessed since 1977 (n = 144, Fig.
4A), we observed an 11% decline in total biomass. This trend is mostly driven by declines in
pelagic (mid-water) species, whereas large declines in demersal (bottom-associated) fish stocks
in the North Atlantic were offset by an increase
in demersal biomass in the North Pacific after
1977. This shows how a global average can
mask considerable regional variation. Although
some ecosystems showed relative stability (e.g.,
the eastern Bering Sea, Fig. 4B), some experienced
a collapse of biomass (e.g., eastern Canada,
Fig. 4C), whereas others indicated rebuilding
of some dominant target species (e.g., Northeast
U.S. Shelf, Fig. 4D). These regional examples
illustrate different stages of exploitation and
rebuilding.
Research trawl surveys. The best sources of
information to assess the state of fished communities are repeated scientific surveys that include
both target and nontarget species. We analyzed
research trawl survey data from 19 ecosystems
where such data were available (see Fig. 1B for
locations and fig. S2 and table S3 for full data
set). We found that community trends averaged
across all surveys (Fig. 4E) were broadly similar
to the combined biomass trends seen in the recent
assessments (Fig. 4A), with similar signatures of
stability (Fig. 4F), collapse (Fig. 4G), and recovery (Fig. 4H) in selected regional ecosystems.
Few of these surveys, however, reached back to
the beginning of large-scale industrial exploitation in the 1950s and early 1960s. Where they
did, for example, in the Gulf of Thailand and in
Newfoundland, they revealed a rapid decline in
total biomass within the first 15 to 20 years of
fishing (fig. S2) as predicted by ecosystem
models (Fig. 2). These declines were typically
most pronounced for large predators such as
gadoids (codfishes) and elasmobranchs (sharks
and rays). Subsequent to the initial decline, total
biomass and community composition have often
remained relatively stable (fig. S2), although
there may be substantial species turnover and
collapses of individual stocks (see below).
Across all surveys combined (10), we documented a 32% decline in total biomass, a 56%
decline in large demersal fish biomass (species
≥90 cm maximum length), 8% for medium-sized
demersals (30 to 90 cm), and 1% for small demersals (≤30 cm), whereas invertebrates increased
by 23% and pelagic species by 143% (Fig. 4E).
Increases are likely due to prey release from demersal predators (17, 18).

RESEARCH ARTICLES
catch, whereas sustained management for lower
exploitation rates may promote greater stability
with respect to both biomass and catches. Part of
this stability may arise from the diversity of
discrete populations and species that are more
likely to persist in fisheries with low exploitation
rates (3, 23).
Trends in species collapses. Theory suggests that increases in fishing pressure, even at
levels below MMSY, cause an increasing number
of target and non-target species to collapse (Fig.
2). Reductions in fishing pressure are predicted to
reverse this trajectory, at least partially. By using
biomass data from stock assessments compared
to estimates of unfished biomass (B0) (10), we
found an increasing trend of stock collapses over
time, such that 14% of assessed stocks were
collapsed in 2007, that is, B/B0 < 0.1 (Fig. 4M).
This estimate is in the same range as figures
provided by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), which estimated that
19% of stocks were overexploited and 9% depleted or recovering from depletion in 2007 (24).
Collapse trends vary substantially by region: The
eastern Bering Sea had few assessed fish stocks
collapsed (Fig. 4N), whereas collapses strongly
increased to more than 60% of assessed stocks in
eastern Canada (Fig. 4O) and more than 25% on
the Northeast U.S. Shelf (Fig. 4P).

Fig. 3. Exploitation rate and biomass in large marine ecosystems and
individual stocks. (A) Time trends of biomass (green triangles) are shown
relative to the BMSY (green band), exploitation rates (blue circles) relative
to the uMMSY (light blue band), and a hypothetical conservation objective at
which less than 10% of species are collapsed (uconserve, dark blue band). In
each ecosystem, stock assessments were used to calculated average biomass relative to BMSY and exploitation rate (total catch divided by total
biomass) for assessed species. Reference points were calculated by using
www.sciencemag.org

It appears that recent rebuilding efforts,
although successful in reducing exploitation rates
in several ecosystems (Fig. 3A), have not yet
reversed a general trend of increasing depletion
of individual stocks (Fig. 4M). This matches the
model-derived prediction that reduction of exploitation rate to the level that produces MMSY
will still keep a number of vulnerable species
collapsed (Fig. 2). Rebuilding these collapsed
stocks may require trading off short-term yields
for conservation benefits or, alternatively, more
selective targeting of species that can sustain
current levels of fishing pressure while protecting
others from overexploitation.
Small-scale fisheries. Fish or invertebrate
stocks that are scientifically assessed (n = 177 in
our analysis) or appear in research trawl surveys
(n = 1309 taxa-by-survey combinations in fig. S2)
constitute only a fraction of fisheries worldwide,
which is an important caveat to the above discussion. Moreover they represent a nonrandom
sample dominated by valuable industrial fisheries
with some form of management in developed
countries. The information on other fisheries,
particularly small-scale artisanal and recreational
fisheries is scarcer, less accessible, and more
difficult to interpret. This is because small-scale
fisheries are harder to track, with 12 million fishers
compared with 0.5 million in industrialized

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

catches have increased ~fivefold since 1950 as
total biomass has been fished down (Fig. 4, A
and E) then reached a plateau at ~80 million tons
in the late 1980s (Fig. 4I). Catch composition
with respect to the major species groups has
remained relatively stable over time, with the
exception of large demersal fishes, which have
declined from 23 to 10% of total catch since
1950. Composition with respect to individual
species, however, has fluctuated more widely
owing to stock collapses (3) and expansion to
new fisheries (6). Individual regions showed very
different catch composition and trends, with
large- and medium-sized demersal fish being
historically dominant in the North Atlantic and
North Pacific, small demersals being important in
many tropical areas, and pelagic fish dominating
the catch from oceanic and coastal upwelling
systems (fig. S3). Among our focal regions, the
eastern Bering Sea showed a high and stable
proportion of large demersal fish (Fig. 4J), the
Gulf of St. Lawrence displayed a collapse of the
demersal catch and a replacement with small
pelagic and invertebrate species (Fig. 4K), and
Georges Bank (Fig. 4L) showed a large reduction
in catch associated first with declining stocks and
then with rebuilding efforts. These examples illustrate that the decline and rebuilding of fished
stocks can incur significant costs because of lost

published ecosystem models; the width of the bands represents estimated
uncertainty (10). (B) Current exploitation rate versus biomass for 166
individual stocks. Data are scaled relative to BMSY and the exploitation rate
(uMSY) that allows for maximum sustainable yield. Colors indicate probability of occurrence as revealed by a kernel density smoothing function.
Gray circles indicate that BMSY and uMSY estimates were obtained directly
from assessments; open circles indicate that they were estimated from surplus production models (10).

SCIENCE

VOL 325

31 JULY 2009

581

RESEARCH ARTICLES
when implemented in a top-down manner. More
successful forms of governance have involved
local communities in a co-management arrangement with government or nongovernmental
organizations (26). An example is the rebuilding
of depleted fish stocks on Kenyan coral reefs

Fig. 4. Global and regional trends in fished ecosystems. Biomass trends
computed from stock assessments (A to D), research surveys (E to H), as
well as total catches (I to L) are depicted. Trends in the number of
collapsed taxa (M to P, solid circles) were estimated from assessments,
and changes in the average maximum size, Lmax (M to P, open circles),
were calculated from survey data (10). All data are scaled relative to the

(Fig. 5A). A network of closed areas and the
exclusion of highly unselective beach seines
were implemented in cooperation with local communities and led to a recovery of the biomass and
size of available fish (27). This translated into
steep increases in fishers’ incomes, particularly in

time series maximum. (G) and (K) represent the Southern Gulf of St.
Lawrence (eastern Canada); (H) and (L), Georges Bank (Northeast U.S.
Shelf) only. Collapsed taxa are defined as those where biomass declined
to <10% of their unfished biomass. Colors refer to different species
groups (demersal fish are split into small, medium, and large species
based on the maximum length they can attain).

500

A

Seine net removed

400

Fisher income (KSH d-1)

B

Seine net removed and closed area

No restrictions
300

200

100

0
1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

Year

Fig. 5. Problems and solutions for small-scale fisheries. (A) Rebuilding of Kenyan small-scale fisheries through gear restrictions and closed area
management. Updated, after (27). (B) Movement of fishing effort from developed nations to Africa in the 1990s. Data indicate total access
years in distant-water fishing agreements. Updated, after (39).

582

31 JULY 2009

VOL 325

SCIENCE

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

fisheries (25), and assessments or survey data are
often lacking. Small-scale fisheries catches are
also poorly reported; the best global estimate is
about 21 million tons in 2000 (25). Conventional
management tools used for industrial fisheries are
generally unenforceable in small-scale fisheries

RESEARCH ARTICLES
Table 1. Management tools for rebuilding fisheries. Symbols indicate the contributions of a range of management tools to achieving reductions in exploitation
rate: + tool contributed, ++ an important tool, or +++ an essential tool. Note that these examples are for industrialized fisheries, except Kenya, Chile, and Mexico.
Ratings were supplied and checked by local experts.

Bering Sea,
Gulf of
Alaska
California
Current
Northeast U.S.
Shelf
North Sea,
Celtic-Biscay
Iceland
Southeast
Australian
Shelf
Northwest
Australian
Shelf
New Zealand
Kenya
(Artisanal)
Chile and
Mexico
(Artisanal)
Count
Total score

Total
fishing
effort
reduced

Closed
areas

Catch
shares

Fisheries
certification

Community
comanagement

+++

++

+++

+

+

+++

+++

Capacity
reduced

Total
allowable
catch reduced

+

++

+

++

+

++

+

+

+++

+

+

+++

+

+

+++

+++

++

++

+

+

+++
++

++
+

+

+++

+

+++

+

++
+

+++

++

++

+++

+++

+

+++

10
14

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

Region

Gear
restrictions

7
10

regions that had both closed areas and gear restrictions in place (Fig. 5A). Other examples of successful rebuilding come from Latin America,
particularly Chile and Mexico, where open-access
fisheries for valuable invertebrates were transformed by the establishment of spatial management units that had exclusive access by local
fishing organizations (26). Despite these successes, rebuilding small-scale fisheries remains a
significant challenge in developing countries
where most fishers do not have access to alternative sources of food, income, and employment.
Tools for rebuilding. Management actions
in a few ecosystems have prevented overfishing
or, more commonly, reduced exploitation rates
after a period of overfishing (Figs. 3 to 5).
Diverse management tools have helped to achieve
reductions in exploitation rates (Table 1). The
most commonly used tools overall are gear restrictions, closed areas, and a reduction of fishing capacity, followed by reductions in total
allowable catch and catch shares. Reductions in
fishing capacity and allowable catch directly reduce the exploitation rate of target species by
limiting catches. Gear modifications may be used
to increase selectivity and reduce by-catch of nontarget species. Closed areas are either fully protected marine reserves (as in the Kenyan example
discussed above) or are designed to exclude
specific fisheries from certain areas. They can
initiate recovery by providing refuge for over-

6
18

2
5

8
15

fished stocks (21, 28), restoring community
structure (22) and biodiversity (3), protecting
important habitat features, and increasing ecosystem resilience (29). Assigning dedicated access
privileges, such as catch shares or territorial fishing rights, to individual fishers or fishing communities has often provided economic incentives to
reduce effort and exploitation rate (30) and may
also improve compliance and participation in the
management process (31). Likewise, the certification of sustainable fisheries is increasingly used
as an incentive for improved management practices. Realigning economic incentives with resource conservation (rather than overexploitation)
is increasingly recognized as a critical component
of successful rebuilding efforts (8).
We emphasize that the feasibility and value of
different management tools depends heavily on
local characteristics of the fisheries, ecosystem,
and governance system. For example, the most
important element of small-scale fisheries success has been community-based management
(Table 1), in which local communities develop
context-dependent solutions for matching exploitation rates to the productivity of local resources
(26). A combination of diverse tools, such as
catch restrictions, gear modifications, and closed
areas, is typically required to meet both fisheries
and conservation objectives.
Here we have only identified the proximate
tools, not the ultimate socioeconomic drivers that

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 325

5
13

3
3

4
8

have enabled some regions to prevent or reduce
overfishing while others remained overexploited.
Yet it is generally evident that good local governance, enforcement, and compliance form the
very basis for conservation and rebuilding efforts
(32). Legislation that makes overexploitation illegal and specifies unambiguous control rules
and rebuilding targets has also been critically important, for example, in the United States (8, 28).
Most rebuilding efforts only begin after there
is drastic and undeniable evidence of overexploitation. The inherent uncertainty in fisheries, however, requires that agencies act before it comes to
that stage (33); this is especially true in light of
accelerating global change (34). We found that
only Alaska and New Zealand seemed to have
acted with such foresight, whereas other regions
experienced systemic overexploitation. The data
that we have compiled cannot resolve why inherently complex fish-fisher-management systems
(35) behaved differently in these cases; possible
factors are a combination of abundant resources
and low human population, slow development
of domestic fisheries, and little interference from
international fleets. It would be an important next
step to dissect the underlying socioeconomic and
ecological variables that enabled some regions to
conserve, restore, and rebuild marine resources.
Problems for rebuilding. Despite local successes, it has also become evident that rebuilding
efforts can encounter significant problems and

31 JULY 2009

583

RESEARCH ARTICLES

584

This could be gained by more widespread spatial
experimentation, involving proper controls, good
monitoring, and adaptive management. Some of
the most spectacular rebuilding efforts, such as
those undertaken in California (41), the northeast
United States (21), and northwest Australia (42),
have involved bold experimentation with closed
areas, gear and effort restrictions, and new approaches to catch allocation and enforcement.
Science has a key role to play in guiding such
policies, analyzing the effects of changes in
management and advancing toward more general
rules for rebuilding.
A second area of inquiry relates to the question of how to avoid contentious trade-offs between allowable catch and the conservation of
vulnerable or collapsed species. Recovering these
species while maintaining global catches may be
possible through improved gear technology and a
much more widespread use of ocean zoning into
areas that are managed for fisheries benefits and
others managed for species and habitat conservation. Designing appropriate incentives for
fishers to avoid the catch of threatened species,
for example, through tradable catch and by-catch
quotas, has yielded good results in some regions
(16). Temporary area closures can also be
effective but require detailed mapping of the
distribution of depleted populations and their
habitats.
Conclusions. Marine ecosystems are currently subjected to a range of exploitation rates, resulting in a mosaic of stable, declining, collapsed,
and rebuilding fish stocks and ecosystems.
Management actions have achieved measurable
reductions in exploitation rates in some regions,
but a significant fraction of stocks will remain
collapsed unless there are further reductions in
exploitation rates. Unfortunately, effective controls on exploitation rates are still lacking in vast
areas of the ocean, including those beyond national jurisdiction (6, 8, 32). Ecosystems examined in this paper account for less than a quarter
of world fisheries area and catch, and lightly to
moderately fished and rebuilding ecosystems
(green and yellow areas in Fig. 1B) comprise
less than half of those. They may best be interpreted as large-scale restoration experiments that
demonstrate opportunities for successfully rebuilding marine resources elsewhere. Similar trajectories of recovery have been documented in
protected areas around the world (3, 21, 22),
which currently cover less than 1% of ocean area.
Taken together, these examples provide hope that
despite a long history of overexploitation (1, 2)
marine ecosystems can still recover if exploitation rates are reduced substantially. In fisheries
science, there is a growing consensus that the
exploitation rate that achieves maximum sustainable yield (uMSY) should be reinterpreted as an
upper limit rather than a management target. This
requires overall reductions in exploitation rates,
which can be achieved through a range of management tools. Finding the best management
tools may depend on the local context. Most often,

31 JULY 2009

VOL 325

SCIENCE

it appears that a combination of traditional approaches (catch quotas, community management)
coupled with strategically placed fishing closures,
more selective fishing gear, ocean zoning, and
economic incentives holds much promise for restoring marine fisheries and ecosystems. Within
science, a new cooperation of fisheries scientists
and conservation biologists sharing the best available data, and bridging disciplinary divisions, will
help to inform and improve ecosystem management. We envision a seascape where the rebuilding, conservation, and sustainable use of marine
resources become unifying themes for science,
management, and society. We caution that the road
to recovery is not always simple and not without
short-term costs. Yet, it remains our only option for
insuring fisheries and marine ecosystems against
further depletion and collapse.
References and Notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

32.

J. B. C. Jackson et al., Science 293, 629 (2001).
H. K. Lotze et al., Science 312, 1806 (2006).
B. Worm et al., Science 314, 787 (2006).
R. Hilborn, Ecosystems (N. Y., Print) 10, 1362 (2007).
S. Murawski et al., Science 316, 1281b (2007).
D. Pauly et al., Science 302, 1359 (2003).
T. H. Huxley, Inaugural Meeting of the Fishery Congress:
Address by Professor Huxley (William Clowes and Sons,
London, 1883).
J. R. Beddington, D. J. Agnew, C. W. Clark, Science 316,
1713 (2007).
S. M. Garcia, A. Zerbi, C. Aliaume, T. Do Chi, G. Lasserre,
“The ecosystem approach to fisheries” (FAO, Rome,
2003).
Details on methods and data sources are available as
supporting online material on Science Online.
D. J. Agnew et al., PLoS One 4, e4570 (2009).
E. A. Fulton, A. D. M. Smith, C. R. Johnson,
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 253, 1 (2003).
S. J. Hall et al., Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 63, 1344 (2006).
R. Q. Grafton, T. Kompas, R. W. Hilborn, Science 318,
1601 (2007).
S. Jennings, A. S. Revill, ICES J. Mar. Sci. 64, 1525
(2007).
T. A. Branch, R. Hilborn, Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 65,
1435 (2008).
K. T. Frank, B. Petrie, J. S. Choi, W. C. Leggett, Science
308, 1621 (2005).
J. K. Baum, B. Worm, J. Anim. Ecol. 78, 699 (2009).
D. P. Swain, A. F. Sinclair, Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 57,
1321 (2000).
D. P. Swain, G. A. Chouinard, Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 65,
2315 (2008).
S. A. Murawski, R. Brown, H.-L. Lai, P. J. Rago,
L. Hendrickson, Bull. Mar. Sci. 66, 775 (2000).
F. Micheli, B. S. Halpern, L. W. Botsford, R. R. Warner,
Ecol. Appl. 14, 1709 (2004).
R. Hilborn, T. P. Quinn, D. E. Schindler, D. E. Rogers,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 6564 (2003).
FAO, The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2008
(FAO, Rome, 2009).
D. Pauly, Marit. Stud. 4, 7 (2006).
O. Defeo, J. C. Castilla, Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 15, 265
(2005).
T. R. McClanahan, C. C. Hicks, E. S. Darling, Ecol. Appl.
18, 1516 (2008).
J. F. Caddy, D. J. Agnew, Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 14, 43 (2004).
J. A. Ley, I. A. Halliday, A. J. Tobin, R. N. Garrett, N. A.
Gribble, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 245, 223 (2002).
C. Costello, S. D. Gaines, J. Lynham, Science 321, 1678
(2008).
NRC, Cooperative Research in the National Marine
Fisheries Service (National Research Council Press,
Washington, DC, 2003).
C. Mora et al., PLoS Biol. 7, e1000131 (2009).

www.sciencemag.org

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

short-term costs. On a regional scale, the reduction of quotas, fishing effort, and overcapacity
eliminates jobs, at least in the short term. Initial
losses may create strong resistance from fisheriesdependent communities through the political process. For instance in the United States, where
67 overfished stocks have rebuilding plans, 45%
of those were still being overfished in 2006,
whereas only 3 stocks had been rebuilt at that
time (36). This problem is exacerbated by the fact
that the recovery of depleted stocks can take years
or even decades (28, 37), and during this time
catches may be dramatically reduced (e.g., Fig. 4L).
Furthermore, government subsidies often promote
overfishing and overcapacity and need to be reduced against the interests of those who receive
them (38). Lastly, there is the problem of unreported
and illegal fishing, which can seriously undermine
rebuilding efforts (11). Illegal and unreported catches
vary between regions, ranging between an estimated 3% of total catch in the Northeast Pacific
to 37% in the East Central Atlantic, with a global
average of 18% in 2000–2003 (11).
On a global scale, a key problem for rebuilding is the movement of fishing effort from
industrialized countries to the developing world
(Fig. 5B). This north-south redistribution of
fisheries has been accelerating since the 1960s
(39) and could in part be a perverse side effect
of efforts to restore depleted fisheries in the
developed world, as some fishing effort is displaced to countries with weaker laws and enforcement capacity. The situation is particularly
well documented for West Africa (39) and more
recently East Africa, where local fisheries have
seen increasing competition from foreign fleets
operating under national access agreements (Fig.
5B) and where illegal and unreported catches
are higher than anywhere else (11). Almost all
of the fish caught by foreign fleets is consumed
in industrialized countries and may threaten
regional food security (39) and biodiversity (40)
in the developing world. Clearly, more global
oversight is needed to ensure that rebuilding
efforts in some regions do not cause problems
elsewhere. For example, fishing vessels removed
in effort-reduction schemes would ideally be
prohibited from migrating to other regions and
exacerbating existing problems with overcapacity
and overexploitation.
Open questions. Rebuilding efforts raise a
number of scientific questions. Recovery of depleted stocks is still a poorly understood process,
particularly for demersal species (37). It is potentially constrained by the magnitude of previous decline (37), the loss of biodiversity (3, 23),
species life histories (37), species interactions
(17, 18, 20), and climate (28, 34). Yet, many
examples of recovery exist, both in protected
areas (3, 21, 22) and in large-scale ecosystems
where exploitation was substantially reduced
(Fig. 3A). A better understanding of how to
predict and better manage for recovery will require insight into the resilience and productivity
of individual populations and their communities.

RESEARCH ARTICLES
42. K. J. Sainsbury, R. A. Campbell, R. Lindholm, A. W.
Whitelaw, in Fisheries Management: Global Trends,
E. K. Pikitch, D. D. Huppert, M. P. Sissenwine, Eds.
(American Fisheries Society, Bethesda, MD, 1997),
pp. 107–112.
43. This work was conducted as part of the “Finding common
ground in marine conservation and management”
Working Group supported by the National Center for
Ecological Analysis and Synthesis funded by NSF, the
University of California, and the Santa Barbara campus.
The authors acknowledge the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and the Canadian
Foundation for Innovation for funding database
development, the Sea Around Us Project funded by

Pre-Target Axon Sorting Establishes
the Neural Map Topography
Takeshi Imai,1* Takahiro Yamazaki,1* Reiko Kobayakawa,1 Ko Kobayakawa,1 Takaya Abe,2
Misao Suzuki,3 Hitoshi Sakano1†
Sensory information detected by the peripheral nervous system is represented as a topographic
map in the brain. It has long been thought that the topography of the map is determined by
graded positional cues that are expressed by the target. Here, we analyzed the pre-target axon
sorting for olfactory map formation in mice. In olfactory sensory neurons, an axon guidance
receptor, Neuropilin-1, and its repulsive ligand, Semaphorin-3A, are expressed in a complementary
manner. We found that expression levels of Neuropilin-1 determined both pre-target sorting and
projection sites of axons. Olfactory sensory neuron–specific knockout of Semaphorin-3A perturbed
axon sorting and altered the olfactory map topography. Thus, pre-target axon sorting plays an
important role in establishing the topographic order based on the relative levels of guidance
molecules expressed by axons.
n the vertebrate nervous system, sensory information is spatially encoded in the brain,
forming topographic maps that are fundamental for cognition and higher-order processing
of sensory information (1, 2). Molecular mechanisms of topographic map formation have been
extensively studied in the visual system. The visual image on the retina is roughly preserved in
the tectum, which receives retinal ganglion cell
axons. Nearly 50 years ago, Sperry proposed the
“chemoaffinity hypothesis,” in which target cells
present chemical cues to guide axons to their destinations (3). Axonal projection of retinal ganglion
cells is instructed by several pairs of axon guidance molecules that demonstrate graded expression in the retina and tectum (1, 2).
Olfactory information is also encoded in a
topographic map formed on the olfactory bulb
(OB), a part of the forebrain. In rodents, odors are
detected with ~1000 types of odorant receptors
(ORs) expressed in olfactory sensory neurons

I

1

Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School
of Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.
Laboratory for Animal Resources and Genetic Engineering,
Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN, Kobe 650-0047,
Japan. 3Division of Transgenic Technology, Center for Animal
Resources and Development, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
860-0081, Japan.
2

*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
sakano@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

(OSNs) in the olfactory epithelium (4). Each OSN
expresses only one functional OR gene (5, 6).
Furthermore, OSNs expressing a given type of
OR converge their axons to a specific glomerulus
on each glomerular map in the OB (7–9). During
olfactory development, OSN axons are guided to
approximate locations in the OB by the combination of dorsal-ventral patterning, based on anatomical locations of OSNs in the olfactory epithelium
(10), and anterior-posterior patterning, regulated
by OR-derived cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) signals (11, 12). The glomerular arrangement along the dorsal-ventral axis appears to be determined by axon guidance molecules expressed in
a graded manner along the dorsomedial-ventrolateral
axis in the olfactory epithelium, such as Robo-2
(13) and Neuropilin-2 (14). Unlike dorsal-ventral positioning, anterior-posterior positioning of glomeruli
is independent of positional information in the olfactory epithelium. Instead, OR-specific cAMP signals
determine the expression levels of Neuropilin-1
(Nrp1) in OSN axon termini, forming a gradient
of Nrp1 (11). Thus, the olfactory system also uses
gradients of axon guidance molecules to form the
topographic map.
How then do guidance molecules regulate
topographic map formation? Does map formation solely depend on axon-target interaction?
Topographic order emerges in axon bundles, well
before they reach the target (15, 16). Here, we
studied the pre-target sorting of OSN axons and

www.sciencemag.org

SCIENCE

VOL 325

Pew Charitable Trusts for compiling global catch data,
and numerous colleagues and institutions around the
world for sharing fisheries assessment, catch, access, and
survey data, and ecosystem models (see SOM for full
acknowledgments).

Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/325/5940/578/DC1
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S6
Tables S1 to S7
References and Notes
27 April 2009; accepted 22 June 2009
10.1126/science.1173146

its role in topographic map formation in the
mouse olfactory system.
Nrp1 regulates axonal projection of OSNs
along the anterior-posterior axis. OR-derived
cAMP signals regulate the axonal projection of
OSNs along the anterior-posterior axis in the OB;
low cAMP leads to anterior positioning and high
cAMP leads to posterior positioning (11). Furthermore, the levels of Nrp1 in OSN axon termini
correlated with the level of cAMP signals (11).
We found that the Nrp1 levels determine the
glomerular positioning along the anterior-posterior
axis. When Nrp1 was overexpressed in OR-I7–
expressing OSNs (fig. S1), projection sites shifted
posteriorly relative to the control (Fig. 1A and fig.
S2). In contrast, when Nrp1 was knocked out specifically in I7 OSNs, the projection sites shifted
anteriorly relative to the control (Fig. 1A and fig.
S2). In the pan-OSN Nrp1 knockout, however,
projection sites for I7 often split into anterior and
posterior areas (fig. S3). If absolute Nrp1 levels
determine glomerular positioning, all glomeruli
should form in the anterior OB in the pan-OSN
knockout, and the results for I7 OSNs should be
the same between the I7-specific knockout and
pan-OSN knockout. These results indicate that the
relative Nrp1 levels among axons determine the
OSN projection sites.
Pre-target axon sorting in the bundle. How
do the relative levels of Nrp1 determine the
anterior-posterior positioning of glomeruli in the
axonal projection of OSNs? To determine where
the organization occurs for the olfactory map topography, we analyzed the axon bundles of dorsalzone (D-zone) OSNs that project to the dorsal
domain (D domain) of the OB. The D domain
OB comprises two regions, DI and DII; DI is
represented by class I ORs, and DII is represented
by class II ORs. Class I and class II ORs are
phylogenetically distinct and their glomeruli are
segregated in the OB (17). We subdivided DII
into two areas on the basis of Nrp1 expression
level (18): DII-P is the posterior portion innervated by Nrp1-high axons, and DII-A is the
anterior region innervated by Nrp1-low axons.
Thus, the D domain can be divided into three
areas: DI, DII-A, and DII-P (Fig. 1B).
Axon bundles that project to the D-domain
OB were analyzed in neonatal mice by staining
serial coronal sections from the anterior olfactory
epithelium through the OB. Within the bundle,

31 JULY 2009

Downloaded from www.sciencemag.org on July 30, 2009

33. D. Ludwig, R. Hilborn, C. Walters, Science 260, 17
(1993).
34. K. M. Brander, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 19709
(2007).
35. P. A. Larkin, Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 9, 57 (1978).
36. A. A. Rosenberg, J. H. Swasey, M. Bowman, Front. Ecol.
Environ 4, 303 (2006).
37. J. A. Hutchings, J. D. Reynolds, Bioscience 54, 297
(2004).
38. U. R. Sumaila et al., Fish. Res. 88, 1 (2007).
39. J. Alder, U. R. Sumaila, J. Environ. Dev. 13, 156
(2004).
40. J. S. Brashares et al., Science 306, 1180 (2004).
41. M. Dalton, S. Ralston, Mar. Resour. Econ. 18, 67 (2004).

585

www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/325/5940/578/DC1

Supporting Online Material for
Rebuilding Global Fisheries
Boris Worm,* Ray Hilborn,* Julia K. Baum, Trevor A. Branch, Jeremy S. Collie,
Christopher Costello, Michael J. Fogarty, Elizabeth A. Fulton, Jeffrey A. Hutchings,
Simon Jennings, Olaf P. Jensen, Heike K. Lotze, Pamela M. Mace, Tim R. McClanahan,
Cóilín Minto, Stephen R. Palumbi, Ana M. Parma, Daniel Ricard, Andrew A. Rosenberg,
Reg Watson, Dirk Zeller
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: bworm@dal.ca (B.W.);
rayh@u.washington.edu (R.H.)
Published 31 July 2009, Science 325, 578 (2009)
DOI: 10.1126/science.1173146

This PDF file includes:
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S6
Tables S1 to S7
References

1

Rebuilding global fisheries: Supporting Online Material
Boris Worm, Ray Hilborn, Julia K. Baum, Trevor A. Branch, Jeremy S. Collie, Christopher
Costello, Michael J. Fogarty, Elizabeth A. Fulton, Jeffrey A. Hutchings, Simon Jennings, Olaf P.
Jensen, Heike K. Lotze, Pamela M. Mace, Tim R. McClanahan, Cóilín Minto, Stephen R.
Palumbi, Ana M. Parma, Daniel Ricard, Andrew A. Rosenberg, Reg Watson, Dirk Zeller
Methods and Data Sources
Supporting Tables S1-S7
Supporting Figures S1-S6
Supporting References

Methods and Data Sources
In the following, we describe in detail the methods and data sources supporting our analyses of
(i) ecosystem models, (ii) stock assessment data, (iii) trawl survey data, (iv) catch data, and (v)
fishing access data. Data sources are described in Tables S1-S3 and supporting data are provided
in Tables S4-S7 and Figures S1-S6.

Ecosystem models
We compiled 37 published ecosystem models from 31 systems (Table S1, mapped in Fig. 1).
These models were either ECOPATH with ECOSIM (S1, S2) or ATLANTIS (S3) models. They
were selected because they were publicly available, have been properly documented and quality
controlled, and covered all systems that we examined empirically using the stock assessment and
trawl survey data. For each ecosystem model, we did the following:
1) For each fished group in the model the exploitation rate u (defined as the proportion of
biomass that is removed per year, i.e. ut = Ct / Bt where C is the catch (or ‘yield’) and B is the
available biomass in year t) was incrementally increased and decreased, holding u constant for
all other groups in the model, but allowing for full dynamic responses due to trophic interactions
and direct fisheries extractions. This step produced an estimate of the exploitation rate that
produced maximum sustainable yield uMSY for each species.
2) The u for the fished groups in the model were set to k × uMSY from step 1. Long-term runs
(1000 years) were then run with k incrementing from k = 0 to k = 20. 1000 years was selected
because EwE models are effectively equilibrium models and the simulations had returned to a
stable state by 1000 years.
3) While predation was allowed to vary during step 1, in reality u would also vary across species
through time (with changing targeting and gear use). Also, given ecosystem interactions can be
complex it was felt that it would be beneficial if additional runs were done to try and further fill
out the phase space of possible outcomes when fishing across an entire ecosystem.
Consequently, to complement the MSY based exploration, a set of fisheries policy searches was

2
performed. The objective function used in the search combines economical, ecological and
potentially social terms. The set of searches incremented from the policy with the economic
contribution to the objective function set to 1 (effectively maximizing catch from the system as
there was little actual economic information included in the model formulations) and the
ecological contribution (ecosystem structure and mandated rebuilding) set to 0 through to the
opposite weightings (economic weighting = 0, ecological = 1). Levels of mandated rebuilding
from base ECOPATH levels were set based on how the base ECOPATH model biomasses
compared with 40% of the unfished biomass levels (taken from a long-term run of the ECOSIM
model with all u set to 0). Values relative to the unfished run were used, because many of the
ECOPATH models included heavily exploited groups (that were in an already depleted state and
so simply setting rebuilding to 0.4 of ECOPATH values would be inappropriate). Ideally social
(employment) considerations would have also been included in this policy search. Unfortunately,
employment information was not readily available for many of the modeled fleets and the same
fleet resolution was not available in all models, so social contributions to the objective function
were not considered.
4) The results from the different analyses per system (i.e. the results of steps 2 and 3) were then
combined to produce aggregate plots of catch, available biomass, size, and the number of groups
that have dropped below 10% of their unfished levels (defined as ‘collapsed’) against the systemlevel exploitation rate (calculated as the catch / total available biomass).
5) Using the catch-exploitation rate plot for each system, the point of MMSY was defined as the
peak of the plot, with the bands of uncertainty defined as the exploitation rates producing 90% of
that peak catch. Similarly the conservation reference point uconserve (10% of stocks collapsed) and
associated uncertainty band was read off the model plots, with the band defined as the u giving
9-11% of the stocks collapsed. Where alternative parameterizations for the model existed (e.g.
for the Benguela and SE Australia) all steps 1-4 and calculation of MMSY and conservation
reference points were repeated and in all cases the resulting values from the alternative
parameterizations fell within the uncertainty bands defined from the original plots. Where there
was any difference in the uncertainty bands produced by the alternative parameterizations these
were combined to give the final uncertainty band used in Fig 3A. In addition, in some cases it
was necessary to combine the results of multiple models to produce results at an LME or
regional scale for Fig 3A, such as the Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf LME which includes the
Northern Gulf St Lawrence and Grand Banks models, and the Celtic-Biscay LME which
includes the Bay of Biscay, Irish Sea, and Western English Channel models. In those cases the
final bands were created using an area-based weighted average (so a model covering a smaller
section of the overall area contributed less to the average).
6) An overall plot (Fig. S1) was created by averaging the results in step 4 across all ecosystems,
the confidence bounds in the plot mark one standard error from the mean.
Comparing ecosystem and single-species MSY
In some cases (e.g. Georgia Strait, Southeast Australian shelf) the sum of the predicted singlespecies MSY did approximate (within 2%) the system-level catches (MMSY). (S4) found this
from some systems, even when at an individual level the realized catches of species within those
systems could be strongly different to the predicted single-species MSY and often at the expense

3
of top predators. However, it would be inappropriate to use this result as a “rule of thumb” to
predict what MMSY would be for a system, as the sum of single-species MSY is generally a poor
predictor of multi-species MSY. This is because it’s hard to say a priori whether depensatory or
compensatory responses to fishing will occur. These responses will lead to divergence between
yields at the system level and those predicted by single-species assessments as seen in (S5). The
sum of predicted single-species MSY differed from system-level MMSY by more than 20% in
42% of the systems and by more than 50% in 18% of the systems.
Across the modeled systems there were examples of systems for which the sum of singlespecies MSY exceeded MMSY (e.g. Great Barrier Reef, North Sea); however there were also
cases (e.g. Central North Pacific, Bay of Biscay) where the sum of single-species MSY was less
than MMSY (but at a significant cost to top and even medium level predators). Looking at system
type (inshore versus shelf or open ocean; temperate versus tropical), there is no consistent pattern
regarding how MMSY at a system level will compare with the sum of single-species MSY. In
contrast, patterns of response are clearer at an individual group level. For individual groups,
across all systems, it was found that MMSY is never significantly greater than MSY at the higher
trophic levels, whereas this is often the case at lower trophic levels. In the majority (61-71%) of
cases the catch, when the system was fished at uMMSY, was greater than the catch predicted from
single-species models for groups of trophic level 1 or 2. For trophic level 3, there was an even
split in the number of cases in which the catch of a group under uMMSY exceeded the expected
MSY and vice versa (i.e. MSY > MMSY for that group in 50% of cases). For the highest trophic
levels (4+) in the majority of cases (66-84%) the group-level catch under uMMSY is much less than
MSY. For those cases in which MMSY is not less than MSY then they are effectively identical
(differing by less than 4%).
Creating the exploitation-rate plots
To give insight into the history of the exploitation of a range of systems from around the world,
reference points were taken from the ecosystem modeling analysis (see step 5 above) and
compared with the history of overall exploitation rates observed (calculated from catch and
biomass for assessed species) in those same systems (Fig. 3A, Table S4, see stock assessment
data). The reference points were (i) uMMSY: the band of exploitation rates that produced the
maximum system-level catch (uncertainty associated with the models and also the shape of the
curves meant there was no single peak exploitation rate, but rather a band of potential rates) and
(ii) uconserve: the band of exploitation rates where 10% of the groups in the model fell below 10%
of their unfished biomass levels (u = 0 for all system components). This latter reference point
was chosen as a hypothetical conservation objective; as there is no easily defined conservation
equivalent of an MSY concept, the use of other levels of extirpation could be substituted.
In Fig. 3A, the ratio of biomass B to BMSY was calculated for each of these systems, from
corresponding units, the ratio of spawning biomass to the spawning biomass that would be
present in a system producing MSY, but sometimes total biomass for both. Where available, these
ratios were obtained from the stock assessments, otherwise BMSY was calculated using the surplus
production model approached outlined below.

4

Stock assessment data
We gathered time series of recorded catch, model-estimated biomass and fishing mortality rates,
and reference points (BMSY and uMSY, the biomass and exploitation rate, respectively, that result in
maximum sustainable yield) from published stock assessments of exploited marine fish and
invertebrate stocks and from personal communications with stock assessment scientists (see
Table S2). We attempted to gather the most recent available assessments for stocks around the
world in which a population model was applied to estimate a time series of biomass and
exploitation rates. While we compiled the majority of assessments we have identified, the data
set is not complete and is evolving. Many regions are under-represented either because of
analytical uncertainties associated with recent attempts to assess the stocks or because
assessments for previously over-exploited stocks are highly uncertain or are no longer
conducted. A prime example is that of northern cod off Newfoundland and Labrador, a stock
estimated to have declined 99% between 1962 and 1992, for which the offshore segment of the
stock has not been assessed since shortly after it collapsed in 1992.
Where assessment estimates of BMSY and uMSY (or the instantaneous fishing mortality rate FMSY
which was provided for some stocks) were available (N = 41 stocks for uMSY or FMSY and N = 54
stocks for BMSY), these were used to determine stock status (Fig. 3B and Fig. 4M-P). Where these
reference points were unavailable, we fit a surplus-production model to time series of annual
total biomass Bt and total catch or landings (where catch was unavailable) Ct from the
assessments. The surplus-production model was only applied where ≥20 years of catch or
landings and biomass data were available. One hundred and sixty-six of the 239 stock
assessments that we gathered either had BMSY and uMSY reference points provided or had ≥20
years of catch or landings and biomass data.
Overall biomass trends computed from stock assessments (Fig. 4A-D) are provided in Table S5.
Surplus-production model
Surplus production in year t, Pt, a commonly-used measure of stock productivity has been used
previously (S6, S7, S8) where surplus production in year t, Pt, can be calculated as:
(1)

Pt = Bt +1 − Bt + Ct

where Bt is the biomass at time t and Ct is the catch at time t.
We fit a Schaefer surplus-production model, which is based on a logistic model of population
growth (S9) to the catch and biomass time series data. The predicted surplus production in each
year in the Schaefer model is given by:
(2)

4mBt
⎛B ⎞
− 4m⎜ t ⎟
Pˆt =
K
⎝K⎠

2

where m is the maximum sustainable yield and K is the carrying capacity or equilibrium biomass
in the absence of fishing.

5
We estimated the model parameters (m and K) using maximum likelihood in AD Model Builder
(http://admb-project.org) assuming that the residuals ε t = Pt − Pˆt were normally distributed.
For the Schaefer model, BMSY is simply 0.5K, and the harvest rate that results in maximum
sustainable yield, uMSY, is m/BMSY. Carrying capacity was constrained to be less than twice the
maximum observed biomass. Thirty-eight percent of stocks were affected by this constraint. For
five Eastern Bering Sea crab stocks, only BMSY reference points were available, not uMSY reference
points and surplus production model fits could not be obtained, therefore the total number of
stocks for which we were able to obtain estimates of Bcurrent/BMSY and ucurrent/uMSY was 160 (Fig.
3B).

(

)

We compared the surplus production model estimates of Bcurrent/BMSY and ucurrent/uMSY to the value
of these ratios obtained from the assessments for all stocks which had assessment-based
reference points. After replacing values of these ratios that were greater than 2 with a value of 2
(as was done in Fig. 3B), the Pearson correlation between the harvest rate ratios from the surplus
production model and the harvest rate ratios from the assessments was r = 0.62. The equivalent
correlation for the biomass ratios was r = 0.65. All stocks used in this analysis and their
estimated Bcurrent/BMSY and ucurrent/uMSY are shown in Table S2.
Caveats on MSY-related calculations
Despite the fact that the concept of MSY has been prominent in the fisheries science and
management literature for about 5 decades, it is not uniformly defined or estimated. Numeric
values of BMSY and uMSY are dependent on the vulnerability of different ages or sizes of fish to
fishing gear; whether BMSY is defined in terms of spawning biomass, available (exploitable)
biomass, or total biomass; the harvest strategy used or assumed (e.g. a constant catch strategy or
a constant fishing mortality strategy); and the model or method used for estimation. The
Schaefer surplus-production model used here when the management agency did not provide its
own estimates of BMSY assumes a symmetric relationship between sustainable yield and biomass
(with BMSY being half of the carrying capacity) whereas the more common result is that BMSY is
less than half of carrying capacity, usually in the range 25-40%. If exploitation can be delayed
until several years after the onset of maturity, then this range will be even lower.
Use of asymmetric models will undoubtedly give different estimates of the MSY related ratios.
This coupled with our decision to use the estimates provided with assessments in preference
means that the ratio estimates may not be fully consistent. However, we believe that our analysis
represents a first attempt to characterize the status of a large number of fisheries worldwide in
terms of both Bcurrent/BMSY and ucurrent/uMSY . Detailed analysis of individual stocks will
undoubtedly come to different conclusions if other models or data are used.
Finally, catch time series presented in the assessments should match time series of exploitation
estimates derived from the instantaneous fishing mortality rates. In cases where these differ, for
example when unaccounted discards or misreporting lead to commercial data being omitted or
down-weighted in the assessment, the ratios of exploitation rates to the reference exploitation
rate will also differ. In a preliminary investigation of ICES stocks, for example, differences
between ratios based on exploitation estimates from catches and mortality rates were typically
small, with the important exceptions of West of Scotland cod and haddock, and Irish Sea cod.

6
For these stocks the exploitation ratios were higher when based on converted fishing mortality
rates than when using catches or landings. The differences follow from our decision to use a
consistent method for describing exploitation status, but they do not affect our main conclusions
at regional and global scales. However, the differences do highlight the importance of consulting
the original assessments and assessment scientists when seeking information on the status of
individual stocks.
Methods to obtain trends in relative biomass and exploitation rates
The biomass trends in Fig. 3A for each Large Marine Ecosystem were obtained by taking the
geometric mean of the B/BMSY ratios from assessed stocks in each year (Table S4). The
geometric mean was preferred to an arithmetic mean since these are averages of ratios. The
exploitation rate trends were obtained by calculating the ratio of total catch to total assessment
biomass in each year. Three species were excluded from the trajectories of biomass and
exploitation rate in Fig. 3A, these species were pelagic species with dominant catches but these
catches fell mostly outside the Large Marine Ecosystems examined. The excluded species were:
Pacific hake (Merluccius productus) for the California Current, Atlantic menhaden (Brevoortia
tyrannus) in the Northeast U.S. Shelf, and blue whiting (Micromesistius poutassou) in the CelticBiscay Shelf.
Methods to calculate trends in collapsed taxa
To calculate trends in the proportion of total stocks collapsed (Fig. 4M-P, Table S7), we
compared time series of biomass B to BMSY. The proportion of collapsed stocks in any year is
simply the number of collapsed stocks divided by the total number of stocks for which an
estimate of biomass was available in that year. A stock was defined as collapsed in any year if
the biomass in that year was less than 20% of BMSY. For a population growing according to the
logistic growth function, this is equivalent to 10% of carrying capacity.

Trawl survey data
We compiled data from 20 long-term research trawl surveys (Fig. S2, Table S3), from a variety
of regions around the world, but dominated by the Northern Hemisphere (n = 17) and especially
the Northwest Atlantic (n = 10). The surveys each spanned at least 18 years from earliest to the
latest and contained at least ten annual surveys. Surveys were typically obtained directly from
the agency responsible for the surveys, but also from published sources.
Each taxon in each survey was allocated to a category: invertebrate, pelagic fish and demersal
fish. The demersal fish were further subdivided into small (≤30 cm), medium (30-90 cm) and
large (≥90 cm) (as plotted in Fig. S2) categories based on the maximum length (Lmax) recorded in
the online database FishBase (S10), or SeaLifeBase (S11), where available. Where Lmax was
missing for a particular species, these were assumed to be the average for that genus or where
that was not possible, from family or higher-level taxon. In the rare instances where all of these
methods failed in obtaining Lmax values (<1% of the total), they were obtained from a variety of
grey literature and internet sites. Allocation to demersal or pelagic were based on the habitat
categories in FishBase with categories of bathydemersal, benthopelagic, and reef-associated all

7
assumed to be “demersal”, and categories of bathypelagic, pelagic-neritic and pelagic-oceanic all
assumed to be “pelagic”. Although the default option for benthopelagic species was to assume
they were demersal, the following species of obviously pelagic nature (Atlantic herring Clupea
harengus, American butterfish Peprilus triacanthus, black mackerel Scombrolabrax heterolepis,
oxeye herring Megalops cyprinoides, red tailed round scad Decapterus russelli, and jack
mackerel Trachurus declivis) were categorized as pelagic.
The survey data typically came from gears designed to adequately sample medium to large
demersal species. While recognizing this limitation for interpreting trends in other categories,
catch trends were included if deemed a reliable index by the agency that supplied the data.
Invertebrates
Invertebrates for a given survey were classified as “not recorded” if a data provider supplied
finfish data only (Table S3). This was the case for: St Pierre Bank, Newfoundland; Southern
Grand Banks, Newfoundland; Southern Gulf of St. Lawrence; Northern Gulf of St. Lawrence;
Celtic Sea; and the North Sea IBTS surveys. In the Scotian Shelf survey data invertebrates are
represented by one species (Illex illecebrosus). No other invertebrate species were recorded in
the data provided. A separate invertebrate survey dataset for this region is only available from
the year 2000, when invertebrates were consistently recorded. Given the short length of this
series, it was not included in the analyses.
Demersal ≤30cm
When the data providers deemed catch trends for small demersals unreliable, “not recorded”
values were assigned. This was the case for: St Pierre Bank, Newfoundland; Northern Gulf of St
Lawrence; and Eastern Bering Sea surveys. In the Eastern Bering Sea survey grouped categories
like “Sculpins” might have contained some component species that were small demersals, but the
groups as a whole were all >30 cm. True zeroes were provided for small demersals in surveys
where the biomass of small demersal species contributed to less than 2% of the total biomass
sampled per year. This was the case for: URI Whale Rock and URI Fox Island surveys.
Pelagic
Similar to small demersals, pelagic species sampling is limited by the demersal nature of the
sampling gear. Here again, if trends in pelagic species were deemed a reliable index by the
agency that sampled them, they were provided and are included in the analyses. Pelagic species
were assigned “not recorded” values because they were not provided in the following surveys: St
Pierre Bank, Newfoundland and Northern Gulf of St Lawrence.
Methods to obtain overall trends in survey biomass
Overall survey biomass trends (Fig. 4E) were based on 19 of the surveys in Table S3 and are
shown in Table S6. We did not include the South Georgia series in the analysis because only five
commercially important species were reported in the source document and these were not
representative of the ecosystem as a whole. We also excluded years where fewer than four
surveys were represented in the data set.

8

Data standardization
The survey biomass index (biomass, biomass per unit area/tow-time, depending on the survey) of
taxon i in survey s in year t was given by Bi , s ,t . The i taxa (usually identified to species but
occasionally only identified to genus or family) were grouped into one of c = 5 categories as
described above (Pelagic fish, Invertebrate, Demersal fish ≤30 cm, Demersal fish 30-90 cm,
Demersal fish ≥90 cm). The biomass of category c in survey s in year t was given by
(3)

nc , s

Bc ,s ,t = ∑ Bi ,s ,t
i =1

where nc , s is the number of taxa in category c in survey s.
As the data come in a variety of different units, it was necessary to standardize before analyzing
the trends. A standardization method was required that maintained the strength of the category
within a survey but also allowed the categories to be combined across surveys. Assuming that the
biomass indices from a given survey are lognormally distributed within a year, the index was log
transformed:
(4)

bc , s ,t = ln( Bc , s ,t + 1)

The data were standardized by subtracting the survey mean (on the log scale), that is:
(5)

δ c , s ,t = bc , s ,t − bs

where bs is the mean across category and time of the log biomass in survey s.
As the overall mean of the survey is subtracted, the relative strength of each category within a
survey was maintained but the data are now in a standardized format. Plots of the standardized
indices by category are presented in Fig. S4.
Analysis
The goal of the analysis was to obtain an overall trend by category over time (Fig. 4E). The data
were non-independent at the survey level so a hierarchical approach was adopted that accounts
for within-survey correlation.

Linear Mixed Effects with continuous first order within-group correlation
A linear mixed effects model describing the trend for a given category (e.g. Pelagic) was given
by:
(6)

δ sPelagic
= μ t + as + ε s , t
,t

9
where μt was the yearly fixed effect mean, as was the random effect deviation from μt by survey
s, which were distributed normally as ~ N(0, σ a2 ) , and ε st ~ N(0,σ ε2 ) were the normally
distributed residual errors.
The model described in Equation 6 assumes that the within-group observations are considered
exchangeable. To account for the fact that longitudinal data generally have an autocorrelated
structure, this basic model was extended to include autocorrelation in the residuals, i.e.
(7)

Corr (ε s ,t1 , ε s ,t 2 ) = ϕ

− t 2 − t1

where φ was the autocorrelation coefficient.
First-order autocorrelation (AR(1) or a Markov process) occurs when adjacent years are nonindependent, with the strength of the dependence decaying with increasing lag time. Note that
the correlation structure depends on the time distance between the observations, not on their
being strictly consecutive (usual assumption). This maintains the AR(1) correlation structure
when missing data values are present. The estimated fixed effects, confidence intervals, and
residuals are plotted in Figure S5.
For presentation as a stacked barplot, the standardized trends by category were converted back
into positive standardized biomass units using the expected value of a lognormal distribution,
including the random effects variance:
(8)

2

2

E[ΔPelagic
] = e μ t + (σ ε + σ a ) / 2
t

is the antilog of δ tPelagic . The bias correction for a lognormal variable X when
where ΔPelagic
t
transforming to the original scale is Var(X) / 2 , here given by Var(Δ s ,t ) / 2 = (σ ε2 + σ a2 ) / 2 ,
assuming the fixed effects values are constant.

Methods to obtain overall trends in Lmax,t

Overall trends in Lmax (Fig. 4M-P, Table S6) were based on 19 of the surveys in Table S3 and
shown in Table S6. Mean maximum length Lmax for each survey-year combination was
calculated from:
n s ,t

(9)

Lmax, s ,t =

∑L
i =1
n s ,t

Bi , s ,t

i,s

∑B
i =1

i , s ,t

where Li , s is the Lmax for taxon i in survey region s, Bi , s ,t is the biomass estimate for taxon i in
survey s in year t and ns ,t is the number of taxa in survey s in year t. Trends in Lmax, s ,t are
presented in Fig. S6 (panel A).

10
A similar modeling framework to that used for analyzing the standardized biomass indices was
implemented to obtain the combined trend of Lmax over time. The linear mixed effects model was
given by
(10)

Lmax, s ,t = Lmax,t + bs + ε s ,t

where Lmax,t is the yearly average, bs is the deviance from the yearly average by survey s with
bs ~ N(0,σ b2 ) and ε st ~ N(0,σ ε2 ) were the residual errors.

The within-group correlation structure was again assumed AR(1). The average fixed effects,
fitted values to each survey and residuals are plotted in Fig. S6 (panels B and C).
The South Georgia Island surveys were not included in the analyses because only five
commercially exploited fish species were reported in the source document (S12). Analyses
included the Gulf of Thailand surveys only for those years where data were separated out to the
level of taxon (18 years, 1963 and 1966-1982). Analyses were based on biomass estimates which
were reported for all surveys except for the two University of Rhode Island surveys (Fox Island
and Whale Rock), which only reported numbers per survey tow. To avoid over-representing
numerous but small taxa for these two surveys, we converted the reported values to a biomass
index by multiplying the numbers for all years by the average weight for these species during the
later years 1994-2005 when weight data were available. These mean weights were obtained
separately for the two University of Rhode Island surveys.
Survey data analyses were conducted in the R statistical programming environment (S13).

Catch data
Mapped global catch-rates (tonnes km-2 yr-1) used in Figs. 1 and 4 and summarized by LME and
species group in Fig. S3 were constructed with rule-based procedures developed by the Sea
Around Us project (SAUP) based at the Fisheries Centre of the University of British Columbia,
Canada (S14) (www.seaaroundus.org, contact Reg Watson) Available fisheries data were
harmonized from a wide range of sources including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
UN (FAO) and its regional bodies, the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea
(ICES), the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
(CCAMLR), the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO), and many reconstructed
national datasets (S15) to produce a representative database of global fisheries landings (see also
http://www.seaaroundus.org/doc/saup_manual.htm#13). Using additional databases of fishing
access arrangements and/or observed national fleet fishing patterns, and extensive information on
the distribution and harvest patterns of commercial marine species developed by SAUP, the
spatially coarse fisheries landings data records were assigned to a grid of 30-minute latitude ×
30-minute longitude spatial cells from 1950 to 2004. Many subsequent associations were then
made possible with this mapped data including global fishing gear use.

11

Fishing access data
The total years of fishing access by regions (Europe, Russia, Asia) calculated and presented for
the 1990s in Fig. 5B were computed by adding the number of years a foreign country had access
to EEZs of countries in Africa through a bilateral fishing agreement, as defined by (S16). Where
the European Union (EU) entered into an agreement on behalf of its members, the total years
were calculated for each member country that gained access rights under the agreement. Details
of international fishing agreements were obtained from the Sea Around Us Project
(www.seaaroundus.org, contact Dirk Zeller) fishing agreement database, which is based on the
FAO FARISIS database corroborated and supplemented using inter-governmental and
governmental sources (e.g. EUR-Lex) and other references. Where the terms of an agreement
were unknown, duration of one year was used as default. Thus, the information presented here is
conservative and excludes illegal access and traditional access that are not formalized through
bilateral agreements.

12

Supporting Tables
Table S1: List of 37 ecosystem models for 31 systems and their sources used to explore multispecies MSY. For some systems two EwE models from different time periods were used.
System
Alaska Prince William Sound
Aleutians
Australia Darwin Harbour
Baltic
Bay of Biscay
Benguela
Black Sea
California Current
Canada - Nth Gulf St Lawrence
Central Nth Pacific
Chesapeake
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Tropical Pacific
Great Barrier Reef
Georges Bank
Georgia Strait
Gironde Estuary
Grand Banks
Gulf Mexico
Gulf Thailand 1973
Irish Sea
New Zealand
North Sea
North West Shelf
Port Phillip Bay
SE Alaska 1963
SE Australia
Tampa Bay
West Coast Vancouver Island
Western English Channel
West Florida Shelf

Model type
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
2 EwE
EwE
2 EwE and 1 Atlantis
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
EwE
2 EwE and 1 Atlantis
EwE
EwE
2 EwE
EwE

Notes and Source(s)
(S17)
(S18)
(S19)
Database for (S4)
(S20)
Database for (S4)
Database for (S4)
(S21, 22)
(S23)
Database for (S4)
Database for (S4)
Database for (S4)
Database for (S4)
(S24)
(S25)
Database for (S4)
(S26)
(S27)
(S28)
Database for (S4)
(S29)
(S30)
Database for (S4), (S31)
(S32)
(S33)
(S18)
(S34, 35)
Database for (S4)
Database for (S4)
(S36)
(S37)

13
Table S2. Summary of all stock assessments and their sources used in this analysis and their estimated ratios of current biomass to the
equilibrium biomass when harvested at maximum sustainable yield (Bcurrent/BMSY) and current harvest rate (or fishing mortality rate) to
the harvest rate that results in maximum sustainable yield (ucurrent/uMSY). The reference ratios were either obtained directly from stock
assessments (“Yes”) or from surplus production model fits (“No”); where reference ratios could not be obtained (N/A), the stocks
were not plotted in Fig. 3B, but were included in the other analyses.
Large Marine Ecosystem

Scientific name

Fisheries stock

Atlantic High Seas
Atlantic High Seas
Baltic Sea
Baltic Sea
Baltic Sea
Baltic Sea
Baltic Sea
Baltic Sea
Baltic Sea
Barents Sea
Barents Sea
Barents Sea
Barents Sea
Barents Sea
Benguela Current
Benguela Current
Benguela Current
Benguela Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current

Thunnus alalunga
Thunnus thynnus
Gadus morhua
Gadus morhua
Clupea harengus
Clupea harengus
Clupea harengus
Clupea harengus
Sprattus sprattus
Gadus morhua
Mallotus villosus
Reinhardtius hippoglossoides
Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Pollachius virens
Engraulis encrasicolus
Trachurus capensis
Sardinops sagax
Palinurus gilchristi
Reinhardtius stomias
Sebastes melanops
Sebastes melanops
Sebastes mystinus
Sebastes paucispinis
Sebastes pinniger
Sebastes goodei
Sebastes levis

Albacore tuna North Atlantic
Bluefin tuna Eastern Atlantic
Atlantic cod Baltic Areas 22 and 24
Atlantic cod Baltic Areas 25-32
Atlantic herring ICES 25-32
Atlantic herring ICES 30
Atlantic herring ICES 31
Atlantic herring ICES 28
Sprat ICES Baltic Areas 22-32
Atlantic cod Northeast Arctic
Capelin Barents Sea
Greenland halibut Northeast Arctic
Haddock Northeast Arctic
Saithe Northeast Arctic
Anchovy South Africa
Cape horse mackerel South Africa South Coast
Sardine South Africa
Southern spiny lobster South Africa South Coast
Arrowtooth flounder Pacific Coast
Black rockfish Northern Pacific Coast
Black rockfish Southern Pacific Coast
Blue rockfish California
Bocaccio Southern Pacific Coast
Canary rockfish Pacific Coast
Chilipepper Southern Pacific Coast
Cowcod Southern California

Current Bcurrent/ ucurrent/
year
BMSY
uMSY
2005
0.81
1.49
2007
0.34
9.38
2006
0.36
1.43
2006
0.16
1.46
2006
0.69
0.79
2006
1.19
1.10
2006
0.29
1.60
2006
1.21
0.87
2006
1.13
1.27
2006
0.56
1.42
2006
0.17
0.00
2006
0.36
1.20
2006
1.10
1.06
2006
1.70
0.60
2006
0.97
0.36
2007
1.47
0.76
2006
0.75
0.55
2008
0.51
1.50
2007
3.81
0.21
2006
1.45
0.53
2007
2.23
0.19
2007
0.75
1.55
2006
0.32
0.10
2007
0.86
0.04
2007
1.96
0.03
2007
0.09
0.08

From
Source
assessment?
Yes
(S38)
Yes
(S39)
No
(S40)
No
(S40)
No
(S40)
No
(S40)
No
(S40)
No
(S40)
No
(S40)
No
(S41)
No
(S41)
No
(S41)
No
(S41)
No
(S41)
No
(S42)
No
(S43)
No
(S44)
No
(S45)
Yes
(S46)
Yes
(S47)
Yes
(S48)
Yes
(S49)
Yes
(S50)
Yes
(S51)
Yes
(S52)
Yes
(S53)

14
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
California Current
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf

Sebastes crameri
Parophrys vetulus
Raja rhina
Merluccius productus
Sebastes alutus
Anoplopoma fimbria
Sebastes entomelas
Sebastes ruberrimus
Gadus morhua
Gadus morhua
Micromesistius poutassou
Solea vulgaris
Solea vulgaris
Solea vulgaris
Solea vulgaris
Solea vulgaris

Darkblotched rockfish Pacific Coast
English sole Pacific Coast
Longnose skate Pacific Coast
Pacific hake Pacific Coast
Pacific ocean perch Pacific Coast
Sablefish Pacific Coast
Widow rockfish Pacific Coast
Yelloweye rockfish Pacific Coast
Atlantic cod Irish Sea
Atlantic cod West of Scotland
Blue whiting Northeast Atlantic
Common European sole Bay of Biscay
Common European sole Irish Sea
Common European sole ICES VIId
Common European sole Celtic Sea
Common European sole Western English Channel

2007
2007
2007
2008
2007
2007
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

0.73
6.42
1.76
1.61
0.69
1.02
0.88
0.83
0.15
0.12
0.67
0.75
0.36
1.41
0.90
0.51

0.29
0.06
0.46
0.73
0.08
0.69
0.05
0.61
0.56
0.42
1.66
1.00
1.16
0.68
0.95
1.74

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

(S54)
(S55)
(S56)
(S57)
(S58)
(S59)
(S60)
(S61)
(S62)
(S62)
(S63)
(S64)
(S62)
(S65)
(S66)
(S66)

Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Celtic-Biscay Shelf
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea

Pleuronectes platessa
Pleuronectes platessa
Pleuronectes platessa
Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Merluccius merluccius
Clupea harengus
Clupea harengus
Clupea harengus
Scomber scombrus
Merlangius merlangus
Pleuronectes quadrituberculatus
Reinhardtius stomias

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2000
2006
2006
2007
2008

1.07
0.65
0.51
0.58
1.04
0.72
0.18
0.50
0.98
0.44
2.20
2.70

0.23
0.41
1.39
0.73
0.74
0.34
1.59
1.04
0.73
1.25
0.06
0.31

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No

(S62)
(S66)
(S66)
(S62)
(S64)
(S67)
(S67)
(S67)
(S68)
(S66)
(S69)
(S70)

Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea

Pleurogrammus monopterygius
Hippoglossoides elassodon
Reinhardtius hippoglossoides
Lepidopsetta polyxystra

2008
2008
2007
2007

1.71
1.83
1.46
3.02

0.55
0.18
0.05
0.21

No
No
Yes
Yes

(S71)
(S72)
(S73)
(S74)

Eastern Bering Sea

Sebastes polyspinis

European plaice Irish Sea
European plaice ICES VIIe-k
European plaice ICES VIIe
Haddock West of Scotland
Hake Northeast Atlantic North
Atlantic herring Northern Irish Sea
Atlantic herring ICES VIa
Atlantic herring ICES VIa-VIIb-VIIc
Mackerel ICES Northeast Atlantic
Whiting ICES VIIe-k
Alaska plaice Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands
Arrowtooth flounder Bering Sea and Aleutian
Islands
Atka mackerel Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands
Flathead sole Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands
Greenland turbot Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands
Northern rock sole Eastern Bering Sea and Aleutian
Islands
Northern rockfish Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands

2008

1.42

0.13

No

(S75)

15
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea

Gadus macrocephalus
Sebastes alutus

Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Faroe Plateau
Faroe Plateau
Faroe Plateau
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska

Chionoecetes opilio
Chionoecetes bairdi
Theragra chalcogramma
Limanda aspera
Paralithodes platypus
Paralithodes camtschaticus
Paralithodes platypus
Paralithodes camtschaticus
Paralithodes camtschaticus
Lithodes aequispinus
Lithodes aequispinus
Gadus morhua
Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Pollachius virens
Parophrys vetulus
Gadus macrocephalus
Gadus macrocephalus

Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska
Gulf of Alaska

Clupea pallasii
Clupea pallasii
Clupea pallasii
Clupea pallasii
Clupea pallasii
Lepidopsetta bilineata
Anoplopoma fimbria

Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Mexico
Iberian Coastal
Iberian Coastal
Iceland Shelf
Iceland Shelf

Mycteroperca microlepis
Brevoortia patronus
Lepidorhombus boscii
Lepidorhombus whiffiagonis
Gadus morhua
Mallotus villosus

Pacific cod Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands
Pacific ocean perch Eastern Bering Sea and
Aleutian Islands
Snow crab Bering Sea
Tanner crab Bering Sea
Walleye pollock Eastern Bering Sea
Yellowfin sole Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands
Blue king crab Pribilof Islands
Red king crab Norton Sound
Blue king crab St. Matthew Island
Red king crab Pribilof Islands
Red king crab Bristol Bay
Golden king crab Aleutian Islands Eastern Stock
Golden king crab Aleutian Islands Western Stock
Atlantic cod Faroe Plateau
Haddock Faroe Plateau
Saithe Faroe Plateau
English sole Hecate Strait
Pacific cod Hecate Strait
Pacific cod West Coast of Vancouver Island

2007
2008

1.14
1.27

0.93
0.26

No
No

(S76)
(S77)

2008
2007
2007
2007
2008
2008
2008
2009
2008
2007
2007
2006
2006
2006
2001
2004
2001

0.55
0.79
0.92
2.00
0.08
1.47
1.45
1.44
1.27
0.61
0.53
0.26
0.85
0.99
1.23
1.08
1.04

1.49
0.15
0.94
0.69
0.00
NA
NA
NA
1.05
NA
NA
1.52
1.07
1.52
0.37
0.18
0.47

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes

(S78)
(S78)
(S79)
(S80)
(S78)
(S78)
(S78)
(S78)
(S78)
(S78)
(S78)
(S81)
(S81)
(S81)
(S82)
(S83)
(S84)

Pacific herring Central Coast
Pacific herring Prince Rupert District
Pacific herring Queen Charlotte Islands
Pacific herring Strait of Georgia
Pacific herring West Coast of Vancouver Island
Rock sole Hecate Strait
Sablefish Eastern Bering Sea / Aleutian Islands /
Gulf of Alaska
Gag Gulf of Mexico
Gulf menhaden Gulf of Mexico
Fourspotted megrim ICES VIIIc-IXa
Megrim ICES VIIIc-IXa
Atlantic cod Iceland
Capelin Iceland

2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2001
2007

0.30
0.16
0.20
0.91
0.03
1.03
1.05

0.11
0.32
0.00
0.40
0.00
0.45
0.66

No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes

(S85)
(S85)
(S85)
(S85)
(S85)
(S82)
(S86)

2004
2004
2006
2006
2006
2006

1.00
1.08
0.70
0.43
0.46
0.49

1.99
0.48
1.01
1.07
1.17
0.85

Yes
No
No
No
No
No

(S87)
(S88)
(S64)
(S64)
(S81)
(S81)

16
Iceland Shelf
Iceland Shelf
Mediterranean Sea
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
New Zealand Shelf
Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf
Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf
Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf
Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf
Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf
Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf
Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf
North Sea
North Sea
North Sea

Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Clupea harengus
Xiphias gladius
Genypterus blacodes
Genypterus blacodes
Genypterus blacodes
Genypterus blacodes
Genypterus blacodes
Allocyttus niger
Haliotis iris
Haliotis iris
Haliotis iris
Haliotis iris
Rexea solandri
Macruronus novaezelandiae
Macruronus novaezelandiae
Chrysophrys auratus
Pseudocyttus maculatus
Micromesistius australis
Merluccius australis
Merluccius australis
Pseudocaranx dentex
Hippoglossoides platessoides
Hippoglossoides platessoides
Gadus morhua
Gadus morhua
Gadus morhua
Reinhardtius hippoglossoides
Redfish species
Gadus morhua
Gadus morhua
Solea vulgaris

North Sea

Melanogrammus aeglefinus

Haddock Iceland
Atlantic herring Iceland (summer spawners)
Swordfish Mediterranean Sea
Ling New Zealand Areas LIN3 and LIN4
Ling New Zealand Areas LIN5 and LIN6
Ling New Zealand Area LIN6b
Ling New Zealand Area LIN7CK
Ling New Zealand Area LIN7WC
Black oreo west end of Chatham Rise
Paua New Zealand Area PAU5A
Paua New Zealand Area PAU5B
Paua New Zealand Area PAU5D
Paua New Zealand Area PAU7
Common gemfish
Hoki Eastern New Zealand
Hoki Western New Zealand
New Zealand snapper New Zealand SNA8
Smooth oreo west end of Chatham Rise
Southern blue whiting Campbell Island Rise
Southern hake Chatham Rise
Southern hake Sub-Antarctic
Trevally New Zealand Area TRE7
American plaice NAFO 23K
American plaice NAFO 3LNO
Atlantic cod NAFO 3Ps
Atlantic cod NAFO 3Pn4RS
Atlantic cod NAFO 3NO
Greenland halibut NAFO 23KLMNO
Redfish species NAFO 3LN
Atlantic cod Kattegat
Atlantic cod North Sea
Common European sole ICES Kattegat and
Skagerrak
Haddock ICES IIIa and North Sea

2007
2006
2005
2007
2007
2006
2007
2008
2007
2006
2007
2006
2008
2006
2007
2007
2005
2004
2006
2006
2007
2005
2003
2006
2004
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

0.98
1.00
0.94
3.07
3.96
2.19
2.49
2.21
0.99
0.72
1.02
0.44
0.87
1.61
1.11
0.51
0.35
1.06
0.86
1.77
2.91
1.44
0.12
0.08
0.48
0.09
0.02
0.39
1.91
0.19
0.19
1.25

1.23
0.79
1.26
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.32
0.13
0.82
2.83
0.59
2.10
0.94
0.30
0.33
0.57
2.50
0.54
1.20
0.12
0.11
0.83
0.07
0.77
0.41
0.79
0.27
1.73
0.01
0.31
0.80
0.54

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No

(S81)
(S81)
(S89)
(S90)
(S90)
(S91)
(S90)
(S91)
(S91)
(S92)
(S93)
(S92)
(S94)
(S95)
(S96)
(S96)
(S97)
(S91)
(S98)
(S99)
(S100)
(S101)
(S102)
(S103)
(S104)
(S105)
(S106)
(S107)
(S108)
(S40)
(S65)
(S40)

2006

0.62

0.25

No

(S65)

17
North Sea
North Sea
North Sea
North Sea
North Sea
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf

Clupea harengus
Trisopterus esmarkii
Pollachius virens
Ammodytes marinus
Merlangius merlangus
Homarus americanus
Hippoglossoides platessoides
Gadus morhua
Gadus morhua
Gadus morhua
Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Pollachius virens
Tautoga onitis
Pseudopleuronectes americanus

Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Norwegian Sea
Pacific High Seas
Pacific High Seas
Pacific High Seas
Pacific High Seas
Patagonian Shelf
Patagonian Shelf
Patagonian Shelf
Patagonian Shelf
Scotian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf

Pseudopleuronectes americanus
Limanda ferruginea
Brevoortia tyrannus
Gadus morhua
Thunnus alalunga
Thunnus obesus
Katsuwonus pelamis
Thunnus albacares
Merluccius hubbsi
Merluccius hubbsi
Macruronus magellanicus
Micromesistius australis
Gadus morhua
Genypterus blacodes
Genypterus blacodes
Seriolella brama
Seriolella brama

Atlantic herring North Sea
Norway pout North Sea
Saithe ICES IIIa, VI and North Sea
Sandeel North Sea
Whiting ICES IIIa, VIId and North Sea
American lobster Rhode Island
American plaice NAFO 5YZ
Atlantic cod NAFO 5Zjm
Atlantic cod Georges Bank
Atlantic cod Gulf of Maine
Haddock NAFO 4X5Y
Haddock NAFO 5Zejm
Haddock NAFO 5Y
Pollock NAFO 4VWX5Zc
Tautog Rhode Island
Winter flounder Southern New England-Mid
Atlantic
Winter flounder Rhode Island
Yellowtail flounder Georges Bank
Atlantic menhaden
Atlantic cod coastal Norway
Albacore tuna South Pacific Ocean
Bigeye tuna Western Pacific Ocean
Skipjack tuna Central Western Pacific
Yellowfin tuna Central Western Pacific
Argentine hake Northern Argentina
Argentine hake Southern Argentina
Patagonian grenadier Southern Argentina
Southern blue whiting Southern Argentina
Atlantic cod NAFO 4TVn
Ling Great Australian Bight
Ling Southeast Australia
Blue warehou Great Australian Bight
Blue warehou Southeast Australia

2006
2006
2006
2007
2006
2006
2007
2002
2007
2007
2003
2002
2007
2006
2006
2007

0.65
0.90
0.57
0.92
0.33
0.61
0.70
0.34
0.12
0.63
0.85
1.00
0.99
0.56
0.79
0.09

1.32
0.33
0.97
0.24
1.04
0.73
0.30
0.45
0.72
2.40
0.33
0.65
1.21
0.30
0.62
1.10

No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No

(S67)
(S65)
(S65)
(S65)
(S65)
(S109)
(S110)
(S111)
(S110)
(S110)
(S112)
(S113)
(S110)
(S114)
(S109)
(S110)

2006
2007
2005
2006
2006
2006
2006
2005
2007
2007
2006
2007
2006
2007
2007
2006
2006

0.23
0.22
0.47
0.27
2.46
1.05
4.38
1.22
0.19
0.54
2.15
0.38
0.17
1.08
0.59
0.41
0.49

2.02
1.14
0.97
2.17
0.91
1.38
0.31
0.80
1.26
1.67
0.60
1.18
0.32
8.98
2.20
2.04
0.84

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No

(S109)
(S110)
(S115)
(S41)
(S116)
(S117)
(S118)
(S119)
(S120)
(S121)
(S122)
(S123)
(S124)
(S125)
(S125)
(S126)
(S126)

18
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southern Australian Shelf
Southeast U.S. Shelf
Southeast U.S. Shelf

Rexea solandri
Platycephalus conatus
Nemadactylus macropterus
Hoplostethus atlanticus
Sillago flindersi
Seriolella punctata
Neoplatycephalus richardsoni
Pagrus pagrus
Scomberomorus maculatus

Common gemfish Southeast Australia
Deepwater flathead Southeast Australia
Jackass morwong Southeast Australia
Orange roughy Southeast Australia
School whiting Southeast Australia
Silverfish Southeast Australia
Tiger flathead Southeast Australia
Red porgy Southern Atlantic coast
Spanish mackerel Southern Atlantic Coast

2007
2006
2007
2006
2007
2006
2006
2004
2007

0.25
1.43
0.31
0.48
0.66
1.03
1.78
0.61
0.47

0.39
0.61
1.80
0.29
0.82
0.79
1.03
0.39
0.91

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes

(S127)
(S128)
(S129)
(S130)
(S131)
(S132)
(S133)
(S134)
(S135)

19
Table S3. Summary of the trawl surveys compiled for analysis, the number of years in which surveys were conducted, the time span of
the surveys, the number of taxa included in the analysis, how many of these taxa were identified to species, and the number of taxa
that were invertebrate, pelagic (mid-water fish species) and demersal (bottom-dwelling fish species). NR = taxa not reported in a
given survey, URI = University of Rhode Island, MLI = Maurice Lamontagne Institute, NOAA = National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, CEFAS = Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, CSIRO = Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation, ADF&G = Alaska Department of Fish and Game.
Survey name
St. Pierre Bank, Newfoundland
Southern Grand Banks, Newfoundland
Northern Gulf of St. Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St. Lawrence
Scotian Shelf and Bay of Fundy
Gulf of Maine
Georges Bank
URI Fox Island
URI Whale Rock
Mid-Atlantic Bight
South Georgia, Subantarctic
Celtic Sea
North Sea
North-west Australia
Gulf of Thailand
Eastern Bering Sea
Aleutian Islands
Gulf of Alaska small mesh
Gulf of Alaska trawl
US West Coast

Years
40
41
18
37
36
45
45
47
47
41
23
18
28
13
35
27
10
36
10
10

Year range
1951-1995
1952-1995
1990-2007
1971-2007
1970-2006
1963-2007
1963-2007
1959-2005
1959-2005
1967-2007
1970-1992
1987-2004
1980-2007
1978-1997
1961-1995
1982-2008
1980-2006
1972-2007
1984-2007
1977-2004

Taxa
27
20
10
52
49
34
40
25
25
40
5
55
49
542
38
32
66
24
118
58

Species
26
19
9
49
48
34
40
23
23
40
5
53
53
538
5
12
58
13
105
57

Invertebrates
NR
NR
NR
NR
1
3
3
7
7
3
NR
NR
NR
5
6
13
2
11
6
1

Pelagics
1
1
1
7
6
4
1
2
2
4
1
9
4
39
6
2
2
3
8
9

Demersals
26
19
9
45
42
27
36
16
16
33
4
46
45
498
26
17
62
10
104
48

Source or analyst
(S136)
(S136)
Diane Archambault, MLI
(S137)
(S138)
Michael Fogarty, NOAA
Michael Fogarty, NOAA
(S139)
(S139)
Michael Fogarty, NOAA
(S12)
Simon Jennings, CEFAS
Simon Jennings, CEFAS
Beth Fulton, CSIRO
(S140, S141)
Robert Lauth, NOAA
Mark Wilkins, NOAA
Aaren Ellsworth, ADF&G
Mark Wilkins, NOAA
Mark Wilkins, NOAA

20
Table S4. Ecosystem exploitation rates (uave=Ctot/Btot) and average ratio of biomass to BMSY (Bave = B/BMSY) for ecosystems plotted in
Figure 3A, based on stock assessments. The average B/BMSY ratio is the geometric mean of the ratios for individual fishery stocks. For
this analysis, Pacific hake, Atlantic menhaden, and blue whiting were excluded from the California Current, Northeast U.S. Shelf, and
Celtic-Biscay Shelf, respectively (see above text for explanation).
Iceland Shelf
Year
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

uave

0.380
0.415
0.464
0.210
0.311
0.355
0.439
0.403
0.378
0.411
0.424
0.304
0.356
0.375
0.444
0.348
0.309
0.475
0.433
0.434
0.379
0.447
0.448
0.382

Bave

0.771
0.673
0.633
0.555
0.614
0.623
0.634
0.571
0.611
0.635
0.581
0.503
0.512
0.491
0.551
0.545
0.547
0.514
0.489
0.484
0.485
0.457
0.511
0.618

North Sea
uave

0.221
0.259
0.285
0.229
0.247
0.338
0.297
0.251
0.274
0.291
0.292
0.256
0.251
0.251
0.194
0.281
0.184
0.167
0.239
0.198

Bave

0.917
0.804
0.697
0.874
0.742
0.583
0.632
0.617
0.670
0.725
0.646
0.761
0.786
0.645
0.726
0.553
0.633
0.667
0.529
0.540

Celtic-Biscay S. Australia
Shelf
Shelf
uave
Bave
uave
Bave

0.186
0.218
0.211
0.216
0.224
0.192
0.201
0.181
0.183
0.198
0.203
0.181
0.208
0.204
0.222
0.246
0.252
0.230
0.188
0.181
0.214
0.205
0.233
0.241
0.279

0.649
0.787
0.841
0.871
0.785
0.836
0.863
0.856
0.837
0.918
0.894
0.772
0.704
0.660
0.679
0.657
0.649
0.636
0.619
0.618
0.593
0.531
0.544
0.586
0.580

0.030
0.027
0.032
0.030
0.029
0.029
0.027
0.030
0.035
0.040
0.050
0.132
0.175
0.143
0.166
0.113
0.090
0.088
0.085
0.089
0.087
0.086
0.091
0.083
0.094

2.030
2.029
2.013
2.029
1.964
1.900
1.902
1.777
2.002
1.981
2.010
1.918
1.771
1.535
1.304
1.129
1.018
0.952
0.932
0.987
0.932
0.795
0.685
0.636
0.632

California
Current
uave
Bave
0.033 1.853
0.050 1.810
0.030 1.760
0.038 1.746
0.057 1.707
0.062 1.623
0.074 1.543
0.090 1.426
0.067 1.278
0.061 1.169
0.062 1.069
0.061 0.963
0.068 0.893
0.061 0.852
0.071 0.810
0.069 0.772
0.065 0.739
0.061 0.712
0.059 0.678
0.051 0.654
0.049 0.644
0.051 0.643
0.055 0.643
0.040 0.644
0.046 0.659
0.039 0.678
0.032 0.708
0.021 0.764

Northeast U.S.NewfoundlandShelf
Labrad.
uave
Bave
uave
Bave
0.174 0.538
0.176 0.532
0.169 0.574
0.325 0.647 0.128 0.861
0.283 0.672 0.151 0.800
0.345 0.783 0.149 0.829
0.329 0.678 0.150 0.877
0.379 0.690 0.144 0.904
0.382 0.628 0.133 0.954
0.346 0.540 0.131 0.941
0.377 0.448 0.142 0.931
0.330 0.417 0.186 0.852
0.343 0.361 0.220 0.716
0.362 0.338 0.189 0.624
0.299 0.344 0.204 0.550
0.371 0.351 0.229 0.461
0.429 0.340 0.289 0.358
0.430 0.297 0.293 0.243
0.419 0.255 0.311 0.175
0.361 0.233 0.188 0.128
0.249 0.257 0.055 0.127
0.252 0.290 0.059 0.150
0.261 0.314 0.087 0.163
0.253 0.321 0.100 0.176
0.219 0.322 0.125 0.188
0.211 0.357 0.137 0.188
0.212 0.397 0.124 0.192
0.193 0.374 0.118 0.172

Baltic Sea
uave
0.164
0.144
0.154
0.144
0.156
0.186
0.171
0.156
0.146
0.180
0.187
0.197
0.180
0.195
0.179
0.151
0.132
0.116
0.123
0.165
0.143
0.184
0.221
0.219
0.234
0.214
0.223
0.214

Bave
0.803
0.857
0.744
0.700
0.676
0.672
0.693
0.703
0.817
0.773
0.729
0.624
0.668
0.625
0.610
0.652
0.627
0.649
0.701
0.733
0.732
0.706
0.611
0.559
0.526
0.570
0.525
0.510

Eastern
Bering Sea
uave
Bave

0.140
0.121
0.105
0.079
0.070
0.068
0.079
0.077
0.080
0.063
0.091
0.091
0.111
0.119
0.108
0.089
0.091
0.081
0.086
0.094
0.089
0.076
0.084
0.097
0.100

0.792
0.813
0.922
1.020
1.067
0.977
0.868
0.744
0.730
0.854
0.920
1.007
1.183
1.255
1.361
1.351
1.394
1.379
1.401
1.242
1.178
1.100
0.833
1.131
1.134

New Zealand
Shelf
uave
Bave
0.017 2.728
0.024 2.641
0.038 2.479
0.009 2.451
0.015 2.246
0.013 2.284
0.014 2.185
0.014 2.098
0.016 2.046
0.019 1.973
0.015 1.981
0.026 1.966
0.045 1.942
0.078 1.907
0.048 2.007
0.048 1.989
0.063 1.920
0.082 1.796
0.061 1.856
0.052 1.860
0.055 1.786
0.060 1.758
0.088 1.634
0.106 1.561
0.099 1.525
0.111 1.454
0.141 1.366
0.106 1.381

21
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
n stocks
uMMSY
uconserve

0.269
0.345
0.230
0.256

0.733
0.708
0.623
0.687

4
0.23-0.34
0.005-0.10

0.189
0.210
0.157
0.180

0.382
0.391
0.468
0.499

9
0.08-0.16
0.01-0.06

0.223
0.231
0.181
0.167

0.558
0.509
0.496
0.530

17
0.08-0.17
0.006-0.065

0.088
0.088
0.074
0.055

0.645
0.670
0.649
0.638
1.176
11
0.12-0.18
0.005-0.035

0.021 0.838
0.020 0.907
0.019 0.965
0.018 1.016
0.023
16
0.03-0.07
0.01-0.04

0.203
0.260
0.210
0.132

0.371
0.284
0.273
0.310

13
0.20-0.32
0.02-0.08

0.114
0.077
0.075
0.075

0.176
0.178
0.163
0.163

7
0.20-0.26
0.01-0.05

0.183
0.161
0.173
0.166

0.550
0.548
0.562
0.568

7
0.08-0.12
0.03-0.07

0.093 1.104
0.096 1.100
0.106 1.038
0.121 1.032
0.123
20
0.14-0.21
0.02-0.06

0.125
0.078
0.067
0.061

1.295
1.336
1.318
1.391

19
0.08-0.11
0.04-0.06

22
Table S5. Annual total biomass (metric tons) from stock assessments for all data and for the
three focal regions, corresponding to Figs 4A-D. This is based on stocks with assessment
biomass data for at least 25 years within 1977-2006.
Region
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea

Year
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990

Demersal
>90
17,816,886
18,148,804
18,621,668
20,975,601
24,117,281
24,681,175
26,628,867
25,715,680
27,878,462
28,373,242
26,844,578
23,972,032
23,091,704
21,028,206
18,285,742
20,657,921
24,018,728
24,750,393
26,049,168
24,255,480
21,573,705
20,356,689
23,209,113
22,251,220
20,031,195
21,032,807
21,976,779
21,470,974
21,301,002
17,885,573
4,182,241
4,101,016
4,142,030
5,526,030
9,636,570
11,059,670
12,222,520
11,921,580
14,165,850
13,368,060
13,994,680
13,192,110
11,312,030
9,107,410

Demersal
Demersal
30-90
<30
Invertebrate
10,933,201
886,431
11,277,329
819,442
11,417,867
795,435
12,076,138
772,254
13,029,132
697,201
13,750,325
554,708
14,669,171
536,099
14,709,692
544,492
15,070,862
557,139
14,926,243
705,275
15,595,944
865,234
15,064,374
1,015,574
15,188,085
1,123,676
14,909,796
1,141,282
14,697,201
990,974
14,625,057
841,230
14,550,552
721,690
13,897,749
691,168
13,372,661
696,255
12,882,579
692,830
12,842,952
601,987
12,584,281
431,302
12,580,708
307,177
13,317,021
276,214
13,610,095
263,017
14,482,568
265,593
14,545,071
283,830
14,433,304
312,984
14,068,621
351,668
13,890,451
410,944
4,828,054
875,574
5,216,561
809,077
5,538,150
785,558
6,001,714
762,856
6,271,765
687,900
6,474,280
545,966
6,673,643
527,850
6,868,758
536,373
6,897,416
549,137
6,893,876
696,990
7,114,904
856,804
7,187,231
1,006,658
7,430,937
1,113,805
7,763,384
1,130,892

Pelagic
n stocks
39,198,859
144
40,085,956
144
38,718,873
144
39,829,121
144
36,062,916
144
35,554,985
144
44,591,334
144
42,056,401
144
40,471,702
144
36,382,584
144
36,826,942
144
33,677,846
144
32,101,630
144
36,447,263
144
38,417,689
144
36,519,227
144
32,644,692
144
30,501,946
144
30,510,852
144
29,314,150
144
31,217,521
144
32,884,159
144
35,375,669
144
35,606,766
144
35,958,787
144
36,687,404
144
34,845,474
144
33,391,206
144
30,066,567
144
29,066,058
144
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15

23
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Eastern Canada
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf

1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
1978
1979

7,153,070
10,416,780
12,634,860
12,310,360
14,293,790
12,398,500
10,918,220
10,916,180
11,901,510
11,098,780
10,816,550
11,256,650
12,889,180
11,904,540
9,914,060
7,671,050
6,180,190
5,297,950
716,384
918,804
939,788
1,046,927
1,144,446
1,171,863
1,276,854
1,272,302
1,329,463
1,301,265
957,556
791,766
639,677
556,974
402,520
274,751
183,943
166,161
191,785
227,501
256,522
261,392
269,643
247,759
248,661
233,626
218,810
233,618
235,779
226,761
399,970
414,797

7,988,098
8,428,810
8,468,827
8,410,467
8,316,493
8,207,331
8,053,359
7,768,184
7,644,098
7,523,617
7,501,460
7,549,053
7,716,193
8,005,913
8,093,434
8,192,378
8,348,116
8,303,982
1,033,571
1,043,653
905,712
916,708
906,104
939,001
961,264
888,437
853,920
774,311
701,209
645,418
604,011
513,773
472,523
378,716
299,782
229,391
215,451
242,546
264,043
306,123
341,165
366,462
377,957
368,800
377,914
373,657
382,918
387,477
104,135
106,430

-

980,816
831,412
711,773
681,495
686,104
682,239
592,024
421,909
298,740
268,622
256,057
259,051
277,267
306,161
344,444
403,452
443,414
426,422
1,333
1,077

-

15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
14
14

24
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf
Northeast U.S. Shelf

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

435,759
428,435
415,449
367,021
324,101
290,270
276,710
271,898
274,747
265,998
276,399
247,255
203,518
160,959
133,506
137,519
150,559
157,528
158,440
160,913
198,862
244,508
237,761
252,053
250,128
252,222
265,773

108,736
102,113
99,468
92,828
74,021
52,433
42,763
37,210
32,278
32,219
34,031
34,990
33,527
31,056
35,092
33,451
32,780
40,337
43,270
42,567
45,953
45,306
39,697
37,429
30,942
26,540
32,384

-

992
1,530
1,555
1,531
1,780
1,849
2,152
2,270
2,834
3,908
4,576
4,473
4,257
4,476
4,311
4,909
5,543
5,172
4,852
4,046
3,239
2,541
2,053
2,019
2,220
2,605
2,920

-

14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14

25
Table S6. Survey biomass estimates and mean maximum length (cm) from all surveys combined
and for each of the three focal regions (data plotted in Figs 4E-H, M-P). An asterisk next to the
year indicates there were too few surveys conducted in that year for the “All data” values to be
meaningful.
Survey name
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data

Year
1951*
1952*
1953*
1954*
1955*
1956*
1957*
1958*
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993

Demersal Demersal Demersal
Mean
>90
30-90
<30
Invertebrate Pelagic Lmax n surveys
60.20
20.86
NA
NA
NA 80.7
1
43.20
19.97
1.04
NA
0.59 98.0
1
57.32
16.76
1.07
NA
1.16 96.9
2
74.43
4.38
1.07
NA
0.61 115.5
2
23.68
2.46
1.30
NA
0.62 127.5
2
43.59
12.27
1.19
NA
0.56 108.0
2
29.39
20.84
1.27
NA
0.55 94.8
2
30.74
20.20
5.04
NA
0.56 97.2
2
24.00
9.53
1.44
1.70
1.20 107.0
4
21.89
14.26
1.81
1.72
0.84 99.2
4
20.45
14.93
1.49
1.59
0.88 98.9
3
19.31
16.37
1.51
1.38
1.55 89.5
4
15.01
13.72
1.57
0.89
2.81 96.0
7
15.95
10.70
1.71
0.87
1.80 92.8
6
15.03
15.81
1.22
0.61
1.83 88.1
6
14.03
13.08
1.40
1.01
1.57 88.4
6
11.92
11.38
1.33
0.76
1.60 92.2
8
10.67
12.69
1.32
0.99
1.97 92.1
8
11.32
9.32
1.38
1.35
1.68 94.2
7
10.10
10.16
1.60
1.32
1.67 86.2
9
6.62
8.53
1.33
1.53
1.44 79.9
9
7.89
8.95
1.60
1.76
1.53 82.3
11
9.60
8.16
1.26
2.17
1.30 85.0
11
6.83
7.76
1.39
2.19
1.53 77.3
10
7.99
8.13
1.42
2.07
1.96 79.5
10
10.40
9.20
1.21
2.67
1.29 79.1
11
8.77
8.66
1.09
1.38
1.12 82.7
12
7.76
7.65
1.15
1.44
1.05 87.6
12
8.81
7.26
0.96
2.05
1.33 91.9
12
8.64
8.26
1.10
2.14
1.45 87.5
15
12.16
9.21
1.38
2.87
1.66 92.8
12
8.76
7.71
1.01
1.90
1.21 89.0
14
12.09
9.09
0.99
1.72
1.58 95.4
14
10.00
8.31
1.09
1.72
1.79 93.6
13
12.69
9.26
1.29
1.59
2.42 93.8
12
11.22
8.81
1.41
1.59
1.86 88.5
15
11.72
9.95
1.36
2.14
3.02 88.6
15
11.00
9.32
1.20
3.08
2.50 88.0
14
9.02
10.76
1.25
3.04
2.38 84.7
15
10.15
10.00
1.33
2.49
2.19 84.7
16
10.43
8.97
1.30
2.61
2.55 87.1
16
8.42
9.12
1.69
2.45
2.88 84.3
15
6.40
8.10
1.52
2.18
3.84 79.8
15

26
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
All data
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Eastern Bering Sea
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008*
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

6.65
7.02
9.21
9.59
8.86
10.93
10.37
11.13
12.58
12.01
12.16
10.21
10.54
10.53
7.20
88.54
166.71
134.92
126.70
137.42
143.48
185.86
156.88
182.87
133.93
117.94
146.45
150.61
150.86
101.72
90.59
71.56
101.51
132.27
120.40
129.22
200.42
106.54
139.98
86.82
113.60
81.95
55.63
63.78
63.31
63.76
42.96
49.45
70.35
127.53

7.46
10.34
9.47
9.12
8.41
8.85
10.23
9.88
10.21
10.57
8.22
8.25
9.12
8.75
8.96
117.18
125.08
119.58
94.39
95.13
116.31
125.62
116.01
117.44
123.41
125.31
141.37
166.26
131.41
139.62
153.41
135.34
95.01
110.04
128.48
119.00
133.08
145.39
159.51
141.53
128.18
128.88
61.52
73.05
74.95
127.47
95.34
141.25
154.61
107.72

1.27
1.70
1.63
1.28
1.11
1.28
1.26
1.53
1.48
1.56
1.19
1.34
1.10
1.43
NA
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00

2.62
2.47
1.88
1.62
1.34
1.57
1.65
2.10
2.33
2.05
2.05
1.90
2.94
2.10
2.19
52.44
42.57
50.53
26.24
32.83
62.13
70.75
71.87
75.28
78.68
65.46
64.54
64.71
69.07
70.12
87.33
64.90
53.04
66.87
62.83
64.75
67.07
70.08
75.00
70.82
64.77
65.65
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

3.26
4.05
2.18
2.67
2.69
3.02
2.86
3.16
3.56
3.56
3.22
2.83
2.81
2.91
4.27
0.20
1.74
0.58
0.78
0.38
0.23
3.36
0.20
0.22
0.93
0.39
3.66
0.90
1.34
0.62
0.97
0.44
0.57
0.83
1.18
0.39
1.17
2.10
2.55
0.59
0.70
1.80
8.52
12.16
15.97
14.52
7.23
2.54
4.39
6.61

82.9
77.3
86.4
86.8
87.9
87.6
84.8
86.9
86.1
81.3
88.0
82.9
86.8
83.2
80.8
63.5
71.5
68.5
73.9
74.7
68.6
70.1
67.9
69.2
64.7
65.7
68.6
70.0
69.4
65.7
61.7
62.5
68.9
68.5
68.7
67.5
71.5
64.5
66.5
63.4
66.3
63.1
121.6
119.0
113.3
102.9
106.3
106.3
109.4
136.6

15
16
13
14
13
13
13
14
13
13
13
12
10
9
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

27
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Southern Gulf of St Lawrence
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank

1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983

146.36
166.62
251.21
206.59
150.67
123.79
212.80
174.56
132.32
199.90
158.67
118.25
78.36
54.36
72.40
49.24
59.35
61.18
53.46
46.22
61.69
49.13
42.19
73.38
19.57
42.65
20.84
27.34
27.00
126.86
144.93
111.44
64.16
49.20
37.96
19.01
37.89
19.65
48.18
94.09
24.79
46.42
126.31
71.73
106.70
141.93
63.44
118.55
75.16
116.65

141.06
119.09
125.42
72.52
84.87
47.04
61.88
80.95
61.62
98.82
77.43
90.34
75.93
67.96
44.62
41.49
38.62
36.41
27.67
30.80
31.76
36.60
33.51
31.24
40.55
32.04
37.59
34.86
31.43
51.91
28.28
32.61
25.32
22.87
26.89
24.43
27.13
19.74
23.36
40.32
21.39
31.01
27.60
38.46
34.12
28.70
33.44
31.20
31.87
19.62

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.04
0.08
0.08
0.11
0.08
0.11
0.09
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.12
0.09
0.09
0.22
0.13
0.16
0.07
0.01
0.03
0.25
0.24
0.10
0.22
0.13
0.29
0.31
0.14
0.45
0.34
0.03
0.13
0.67
0.07
0.23
0.22
0.20
0.04

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.35
0.86
0.06
0.63
0.71
1.27
1.53
1.53
1.35
4.83
2.37
2.71
11.58
3.90
8.39
8.07
4.73
3.40
2.82
3.08

1.36
1.69
1.50
1.91
0.76
10.41
20.03
18.32
20.63
13.78
13.60
30.64
37.27
15.36
11.42
15.72
25.22
5.15
17.77
7.64
17.88
12.91
18.67
22.94
34.04
33.60
41.88
16.00
124.62
1.51
1.59
0.87
1.45
1.23
1.28
0.46
0.33
1.43
1.56
0.46
1.12
1.38
2.25
0.46
0.79
1.24
0.87
3.85
1.26
3.02

134.1
143.7
152.7
164.2
150.4
154.1
157.8
145.9
138.2
147.2
143.7
117.6
115.4
105.5
130.8
122.8
122.7
144.4
131.3
137.8
132.5
126.7
121.4
137.3
89.9
113.3
87.4
110.3
72.3
107.2
109.7
105.4
105.0
110.4
102.2
92.7
101.8
96.0
119.3
121.0
96.1
112.7
119.2
103.8
122.0
124.8
105.4
124.4
114.1
123.2

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

28
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank
Georges Bank

1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

146.96
139.56
164.11
155.61
112.97
75.12
213.32
96.57
101.35
76.39
35.11
87.50
67.63
86.94
149.64
99.20
69.82
117.70
177.88
110.91
169.92
280.75
179.32
195.69

26.25
17.30
20.37
20.43
15.83
25.40
21.00
14.07
17.62
16.47
17.33
23.96
22.92
26.06
43.51
26.13
34.02
40.81
39.65
29.37
25.50
20.23
24.69
25.95

0.06
0.17
0.22
0.10
0.06
0.18
0.50
0.06
0.13
0.20
0.09
0.04
0.17
0.42
0.08
0.49
0.07
0.21
0.07
0.11
0.20
0.14
0.86
0.37

3.61
3.47
6.09
1.48
7.73
8.98
3.85
8.16
4.52
6.19
7.39
3.30
1.27
2.42
2.33
8.79
6.68
3.05
5.77
4.32
1.70
3.57
4.42
3.71

1.02
4.74
1.92
1.60
5.94
0.87
3.16
2.50
4.75
7.80
5.47
10.02
6.18
5.46
6.17
3.41
3.97
4.52
3.20
8.16
2.85
1.96
2.92
3.09

127.6
127.3
124.7
132.1
122.6
113.1
138.3
127.0
129.5
120.2
102.4
118.1
116.6
122.6
126.4
117.4
103.1
118.8
119.4
120.2
123.3
141.9
132.6
131.3

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

29
Table S7. Number of stock assessments included in the collapse analyses, and the number of
these that were “collapsed”, i.e. with biomass less than 20% of BMSY (data plotted in Fig. 4M-P).
Where surplus production model fits were used to obtain BMSY, this definition of collapse
corresponds to total biomass falling below 10% of pre-exploitation biomass.
Year
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992

All data
Stocks
24
30
33
33
33
35
38
39
41
47
51
54
54
58
65
65
68
69
73
75
80
83
93
99
102
106
109
121
131
134
139
143
147
149
156
158
163
164
164
165
166
166
166

Eastern Bering Sea
Collapsed Stocks Collapsed
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
2
2
2
1
0
1
2
3
3
2
1
1
1
0
2
3
4
13
1
3
14
1
5
15
1
3
15
1
1
17
1
0
17
0
1
17
0
5
17
2
5
18
2
6
18
2
6
18
1
7
18
1
9
19
2
5
20
0
8
20
0
10
20
0

Eastern Canada
Stocks
Collapsed
6
1
6
1
7
1
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
1
8
1
8
2
8
3

Northeast U.S. Shelf
Stocks
Collapsed
10
1
10
2
11
1
12
0
14
0
14
0
14
1
14
1
14
1
14
2
14
3
14
3
14
3
14
3
14
3

30
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

166
166
166
166
166
166
166
166
165
163
162
159
153
148
81

14
13
13
10
12
11
13
13
13
14
17
19
19
21
11

20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20

0
0
0
0
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
6
6
-

4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
5
5
4
4
-

14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
11
11
10
-

5
3
3
3
4
4
3
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
-

31

Supporting Figures

Figure S1: Effects of increasing exploitation rate on 31 model fish communities. Averaged
results of ECOSIM models are displayed, shades refer to 95% confidence bounds.

32

Figure S2. Available survey biomass estimates from 20 ecosystems. Data are grouped into five
categories: invertebrate, pelagic (midwater species), and demersal taxa with maximum lengths of
≤30 cm, 30-90 cm, and ≥90 cm.

33

Figure S3: Global catches from the Sea Around Us database, reported by Large Marine
Ecosystem and species group.

34

Figure S4: Standardized log biomass indices for each survey and category over time.

35

Figure S5: Average trend in survey biomass trends as estimated using a linear mixed effects
analysis with a continuous AR(1) within-group correlation structure (Equation 6). Solid and
dashed black lines in panel (A) indicate overall fixed effect trends and 95% confidence intervals,
respectively; grey lines represent individual survey trends. The fitted values and residuals are
plotted in panel (B).

36

Figure S6. Average trend in Lmax , as estimated using a linear mixed effects analysis with a
continuous AR(1) within-group correlation structure (Equation 10). Individual survey trends are
presented in Panel (A). Solid and dashed black lines in panel (B) indicate overall fixed effects
trends and 95% confidence intervals, respectively; grey lines represent individual survey trends..
The fitted values and residuals are plotted in panel (C).

37

Supporting References
S1.
S2.
S3.
S4.
S5.
S6.
S7.
S8.
S9.
S10.
S11.
S12.
S13.
S14.
S15.
S16.
S17.
S18.
S19.
S20.
S21.
S22.
S23.
S24.
S25.

C. J. Walters, V. Christensen, D. Pauly, Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries 7, 139
(1997).
V. Christensen, C. Walters, Ecological Modeling 172, 109 (2004).
E. A. Fulton, A. D. M. Smith, A. E. Punt, ICES Journal of Marine Science 62, 540
(2005).
C. Walters, V. Christensen, S. J. D. Martell, J. F. Kitchell, ICES Journal of Marine
Science 62, 558 (2005).
F. J. Mueter, B. A. Megrey, Fisheries Research 81, 189 (2006).
R. Hilborn, Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 58, 579 (2001).
L. D. Jacobson et al., Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 58, 1891
(2001).
C. J. Walters, R. Hilborn, V. Christensen, Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 65, 2536 (2008).
T. J. Quinn, Jr., R. B. Deriso, Quantitative Fish Dynamics (Oxford University Press, New
York, 1999), pp. 542.
R. Froese, D. Pauly, FishBase, World Wide Web electronic publication (2009).
M. L. D. Palomares, D. Pauly, SeaLifeBase, World Wide Web electronic publication
(2009).
K. H. Kock, Y. Shimadzu, in Southern Ocean Ecology–the biomass perspective S. Z. ElSayed, Ed. (Cambridge University Press, 1994) pp. 287-312.
R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing (R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2008).
R. Watson, A. Kitchingman, A. Gelchu, D. Pauly, Fish and Fisheries 5 (2004).
D. Zeller, D. Pauly, Reconstruction of marine fisheries catches for key countries and
regions (1950-2005) (Fisheries Centre, 2007).
J. Alder, U. R. Sumaila, The Journal of Environment and Development 13, 156 (2004).
T. A. Okey, D. Pauly, A Trophic Mass Balance Model of Alaska's Prince William Sound
Ecosystem for the Post-Spill Period 1994-1996 (2nd Edition, Fisheries Centre Research
Report 7(4), University of British Columbia, 1999).
S. Guénette, S. J. J. Heymans, V. Christensen, A. W. Tries, Canadian Journal of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 53, 2495 (2006).
J. M. Martin, The distribution, abundance and trophic ecology of the fishes of Darwin
harbour mangrove habitats (PhD thesis, Charles Darwin University (2005).
C. Ainsworth, B. Ferriss, E. Leblond, S. Guénette, in Fisheries impacts on North Atlantic
ecosystems: models and analyses S. Guénette, V. Christensen, D. Pauly, Eds. (Fisheries
Centre University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 2001) pp. 271-313.
J. C. Field, R. C. Francis, K. Aydin, Progress in Oceanography 68, 238 (2006).
E. J. Brand et al., A Spatially Explicit Ecosystem Model of the California Current’s Food
Web and Oceanography (NOAA NWFSC Technical Memorandum, 2007).
L. Morissette et al., Canadian Technical Report in Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 2497,
94 (2003).
N. A. .Gribble, paper presented at the Modelling and Simulation Society of Australia and
New Zealand, December 2005
J. Link et al., Journal of Marine Systems 74, 453 (2008).

38
S26.
S27.
S28.
S29.
S30.
S31.
S32.
S33.
S34.
S35.
S36.
S37.
S38.

S39.

S40.

S41.

S42.
S43.

S44.

J. Lobry, Which reference pattern of functioning for estuarine ecosystems? The case of
fish successions in the Gironde estuary (French Institute of Agricultural and
Environmental Engineering Research, Castas, France, 2004).
A. Bundy, G. Lilly, P. Shelton, A mass balance model of the Newfoundland-Labrador
shelf (Canadian Technical Report Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 2310, 2000).
C. Walters, S. J. D. Martell, V. Christensen, B. Mahmoudi, Bulletin of Marine Science
83, 251 (2008).
K. Lees, S. Mackinson, Science Series Technical Report CEFAS, Lowestoft 138, 49
(2007).
J. M. Bradford-Grieve et al., Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 289,
223 (2003).
S. Mackinson, G. Daskalov, An ecosystem model of the North Sea for use in research
supporting the ecosystem approach to fisheries management: description and
parameterisation (CEFAS Scence Series Technical Report, 2007).
C. Bullman, Trophic webs and modelling of Australia's North West Shelf (CSIRO Marine
and Atmospheric Research, 2006).
E. A. Fulton, A. D. M. Smith, African Journal Marine Science 26, 219 (2004).
C. Bulman et al., Trophic dynamics of the eastern shelf and slope of the south east
fishery: impacts of and on the fishery (Final Report for Fisheries Research and
Development Corporation, Project 2002/028, CSIRO, 2006).
N. L. Klaer, Changes in the Structure of Demersal Fish Communities of the South East
Australian Continental Shelf from 1915 to 1961 (PhD thesis, University of Canberra
2005).
J. N. Araújo et al., Marine Ecology Progress Series 309, 175 (2006).
T. A. Okey et al., Ecological Modeling 172, 339 (2004).
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, Report of the 2007
ICCAT albacore stock assessment session (2007;
www.iccat.int/Documents/Meetings/Docs/2007_ALB%20STOCK%20ASSESS%20REP
_AUG_07.pdf).
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, Report of the 2008
Atlantic bluefin tuna stock assessment session (2008;
http://www.iccat.int/Documents/Meetings/Docs/2008_BFT_STOCK_ASSESS_REP.pdf)
Report of the Baltic Fisheries Assessment Working Group (WGBFAS) (ICES CM
2007/ACFM:15, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007; www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM2007/ACFM/ACFM1507.pdf).
Report of the Arctic Fisheries Working Group (AFWG) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:16,
ICES, Copenhagen, 2007; www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM2007/ACFM/ACFM1607.pdf).
C. L. de Moor, personal communication.
S. J. Johnston, D. S. Butterworth, “The South African horse mackerel assessment for
2007 using an age-structured production model, with future biomass projections”
(2007:WG-Dem:HM:10, Marine and Coastal Management, Cape Town, South Africa,
2007).
C. L. Cunningham, D. S. Butterworth, “Base case assessment of the South African
sardine resource” (MCM/2007/SEP/SWG-PEL/06, Marine and Coastal Management,
Cape Town, South Africa, 2007).

39
S45.

S46.

S47.

S48.
S49.

S50.
S51.
S52.
S53.

S54.

S55.

S56.

S57.

S58.

S59.

S60.

S. J. Johnston, D. S. Butterworth, “Near final specifications for the sex- and area-specific
Operating Models for testing OMPs for the South Coast rock lobster resource”
(WG/05/08/SCRL17, Marine and Coastal Management, Cape Town, South Africa, 2008).
I. C. Kaplan, T. E. Helser, Stock assessment of the arrowtooth flounder (Atheresthes
stomias) population off the west coast of the United States in 2007 (Pacific Council,
2007; www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/ArrowtoothAssess_Aug22.pdf).
F. R. Wallace, Y. W. Cheng, T-S. Tsou, Status of the black rockfish resource north of
Cape Falcon, Oregon to the U.S.-Canadian border in 2006 (Pacific Council, 2008;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/N_BlackRF_07_FullDoc_INCOMPLETE.pdf)
.
D. B. Sampson, The status of black rockfish off Oregon and California in 2007 (Pacific
Council, 2007; www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/BLCK_S_07_FullDoc.pdf).
M. Key, A. D. MacCall, J. Field, D. Aseltine-Neilson, K. Lynn, The 2007 assessment of
blue rockfish (Sebastes mystinus) in California (Pacific Council, 2008;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/KeySAFE_BlueRF_Jan08.pdf).
A. D. MacCall, Status of bocaccio off California in 2007 (Pacific Council, 2008
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/bocaccio2007final.pdf).
I. J. Stewart, Status of the U.S. canary rockfish resource in 2007 (Pacific Council, 2007;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/2007_canary_SAFE.pdf).
J. C. Field, Status of the chilipepper rockfish, Sebastes goodei, in 2007 (Pacific Council,
2007; www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/ChilipepperDec17_2007_DBS.pdf).
E. J. Dick, S. Ralston, D. Pearson, Status of cowcod, Sebastes levis, in the Southern
California Bight (Pacific Council, 2007;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/certified_cowcod_Dec_2007.pdf).
O. S. Hamel, Status and future prospects for the darkblotched rockfish resource in waters
off Washington, Oregon, and California as assessed in 2007 (Pacific Council, 2008;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/Darkblotched_2007_Final.pdf).
I. J. Stewart, Updated U.S. English sole stock assessment: status of the resource in 2007
(Pacific Council, 2007;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/2007_English_sole_update_council.pdf).
V. V. Gertseva, M. J. Schirripa, Status of the longnose skate (Raja rhina) off the
continental US Pacific Coast in 2007 (Pacific Council, 2008;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/LongnoseSkate_2007_FINAL.pdf).
T. E. Helser, I. J. Stewart, O. S. Hamel, Stock assessment of Pacific hake, Merluccius
productus, (a.k.a. whiting) in U.S. and Canadian waters in 2008 (Pacific Council, 2008;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/pacific_hake_assessment_2008_FINAL.pdf).
O. S. Hamel, Status and future prospects for the Pacific ocean perch resource in waters
off Washington and Oregon as assessed in 2007 (Pacific Council, 2007;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/POP2007AssessmentFinal.pdf).
M. J. Schirripa, Status of the sablefish resource off the Continental U.S. Pacific Coast in
2007 (Pacific Council, 2007;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/Sable07v3_0.pdf).
X. He et al. Status of the widow rockfish resource in 2007: an update (Pacific Council,
2007;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/WidowStockAssessment_Update_2007_Final_
Oct_2007.pdf).

40
S61.

S62.

S63.

S64.

S65.

S66.

S67.

S68.

S69.

S70.

S71.

S72.

S73.

S74.

J. R. Wallace, Update to the status of yelloweye rockfish (Sebastes ruberrimus) off the
U.S. West Coast in 2007 (Pacific Council, 2007;
www.pcouncil.org/groundfish/gfsafe1008/Yelloweye_Update_2007_Final_Updated.pdf).
Report of the Working Group on the Assessment of Northern Shelf Demersal Stocks
(WGNSDS) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:22, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007;
www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM-2007/ACFM/ACFM2207.pdf).
Report of the Working Group on Northern Pelagic and Blue Whiting Fisheries
(WGNPBW) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:29, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007;
www.ices.dk/reports/ACOM/2007/WGNPBW/ACFM2907.pdf).
Report of the Working Group on the Assessment of Southern Shelf Stocks of Hake, Monk
and Megrim (WGHMM) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:21, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007;
www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM-2007/ACFM/ACFM2107.pdf).
Report of the Working Group on the Assessment of Demersal Stocks in the North Sea and
Skagerrak - Combined Spring and Autumn (WGNSSK) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:18 &
2007/ACFM:18, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007; www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM2007/ACFM/ACFM18and30.pdf).
Report of the Working Group on the Assessment of Southern Shelf Demersal Stocks
(WGSSDS) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:28, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007;
www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM-2007/ACFM/ACFM2807.pdf).
Report of the Herring Assessment Working Group South of 62°N (HAWG) (ICES CM
2007/ACFM:11, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007; www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM2007/ACFM/ACFM1107.pdf).
Report of the Working Group on the Assessment of Mackerel, Horse Mackerel, Sardine
and Anchovy (WGMHSA) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:31, ICES, Copenhagen, 2007;
www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM-2007/ACFM/ACFM3107.pdf).
T. K. Wilderbuer, D. G. Nichol, P. D. Spencer, North Pacific Groundfish Stock
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 9: Alaska plaice (Alaska
Fisheries Science Center, 2008; www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIplaice.pdf).
T. K. Wilderbuer, D. G. Nichol, K. Aydin, North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment
and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 6: Arrowtooth flounder (Alaska
Fisheries Science Center, 2008; www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIatf.pdf).
S. Lowe et al., North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation
Reports for 2009, 15. Stock assessment of Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands atka mackerel
(Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 2008;
www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIatka.pdf).
W. T. Stockhausen, P. D. Spencer, D. Nichol, North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment
and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 8: Flathead sole (Alaska Fisheries
Science Center, 2008; www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIflathead.pdf).
J. N. Ianelli, T. K. Wilderbuer, D. Nichol, North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment
and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2009, 5. Assessment of Greenland turbot in the
Eastern Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands (Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 2008;
www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIturbot.pdf).
T. K. Wilderbuer, D. G. Nichol, North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment and Fishery
Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 7 Northern rock sole (Alaska Fisheries Science
Center, 2008; www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIrocksole.pdf).

41
S75.

S76.

S77.

S78.

S79.

S80.

S81.

S82.

S83.

S84.

S85.
S86.

S87.

S88.

P. D. Spencer, J. N. Ianelli, North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment and Fishery
Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 12 Northern rockfish (Alaska Fisheries Science
Center, 2008; www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAInorthern.pdf).
G. Thompson, J. Ianelli, R. Lauth, S. Gaichas, K. Aydin, North Pacific Groundfish Stock
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 2: assessment of the
Pacific cod stock in the Eastern Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands area (Alaska Fisheries
Science Center, 2008, www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIpcod.pdf).
P. D. Spencer, J. N. Ianelli, North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment and Fishery
Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 11 Pacific ocean perch (Alaska Fisheries Science
Center, 2008; www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIpop.pdf).
Stock assessment and fishery evaluation report for the king and tanner crab fisheries of
the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands regions (North Pacific Fishery Management Council,
2008; www.fakr.noaa.gov/npfmc/membership/plan_teams/CPT/CRABSAFE2008.pdf).
J. N. Ianelli et al., North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation
Reports for 2009, 1. Assessment of the walleye pollock stock in the Eastern Bering Sea
(Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 2008;
www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/EBSpollock.pdf).
T. K. Wilderbuer, D. G. Nichol, J. Ianelli, North Pacific Groundfish Stock Assessment
and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 4 Yellowtail sole (Alaska Fisheries
Science Center, 2008; www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIyfin.pdf).
Report of the North-Western Working Group (NWWG) (ICES CM 2007/ACFM:17,
ICES, Copenhagen, 2007; www.ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM2007/ACFM/ACFM1707.pdf).
J. Fargo, Flatfish stock assessments for the west coast of Canada and recommended yield
options for 2000 (Canadian Stock Assessment Secretariat Research Document 99/199,
Fisheries and Oceans, Canada, 1999; www.dfompo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/1999/pdf/99_199e.pdf).
A. Sinclair, P. J. Starr, Assessment of Pacific cod in Hecate Strait (5CD) and Queen
Charlotte Sound (5AB), January, 2005 (Canadian Stock Assessment Secretariat Research
Document 2005/026, Fisheries and Oceans, Canada, 2005; www.dfompo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2005/RES2005_026_e.pdf).
P. J. Starr, A. S. Sinclair, J. Boutillier, West Coast Vancouver Island Pacific cod
assessment: 2002 (Canadian Stock Assessment Secretariat Research Document
2002/113, Fisheries and Oceans, Canada, 2002; www.dfompo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2002/RES2002_113e.pdf).
J. Schweigert, personal communication.
D. H. Hanselman, C. R. Lunsford, J. T. Fujioka, C. J. Rodgveller, North Pacific
Groundfish Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Reports for 2009, Chapter 3:
assessment of the sablefish stock in Alaska (Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 2008;
www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2008/BSAIsablefish.pdf).
Final model for Gulf of Mexico gag grouper as recommended by the SEDAR Grouper
Review Panel: revised results and projections (Southeast Fishery Science Center, 2007;
www.sefsc.noaa.gov/sedar/download/Gag-revised-analyses-Sept-20071.pdf?id=DOCUMENT).
D. S. Vaughan, K. W. Shertzer, J. W. Smith, Fish. Res. 83, 263-275 (2007).

42
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, “2007 Mediterranean
swordfish stock assessment session” (SCRS/2007/016, Madrid, Spain, 3-7 September
2007).
S90. P. L. Horn, Stock assessment of ling (Genypterus blacodes) on the Chatham Rise,
Campbell Plateau, and in Cook Strait for the 2007-08 fishing year (New Zealand
Fisheries Assessment Report 2008/24, Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington, New Zealand,
2008; fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2008%20FARs/08_24_FAR.pdf).
S91. P. L. Cordue, personal communication.
S92. P. A. Breen, S. W. Kim, The 2006 stock assessments for paua (Haliotis iris) stocks PAU
5A (Fiordland) and PAU5D (Otago) (New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2007/9,
2007; fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2007%20FARs/07_09_FAR.pdf).
S93. P. A. Breen, A. N. H. Smith, The 2007 assessment for paua (Haliotis iris) stock PAU 5B
(Stewart Island) (New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2008/5, 2008;
fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2008%20FARs/08_05_FAR.pdf).
S94. A. McKenzie, A. N. H. Smith, The 2008 stock assessment of paua (Haliotis iris) in PAU
7 (New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2009/xx, Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington,
New Zealand, 2009; fpcs.fish.govt.nz/Science/ResearchDocuments.aspx).
S95. D. Fu, A. Dunn, R. J. Hurst, Standardised CPUE analysis and stock assessment of
northern gemfish (Rexea solandri) in SKI 1 and 2 for the 2005-06 fishing year (New
Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2008/01, Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington, New
Zealand, 2008; fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2008%20FARs/08_01_FAR.pdf).
S96. R. I. C. C. Francis, Assessment of hoki (Macruronus novaezelandiae) in 2007 (New
Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2008/04, Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington, New
Zealand, 2008; fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2008%20FARs/08_04_FAR.pdf).
S97. N. M. Davies, J. R. McKenzie, D. J. Gilbert, Assessment of the SNA 8 stock for the 200304 fishing year (New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2006/09, Ministry of
Fisheries, Wellington, New Zealand, 2006;
fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2006%20FARs/06_09_FAR.pdf).
S98. S. M. Hanchet, R. G. Blackwell, M. L. Stevenson, Southern blue whiting (Micromesistius
australis) stock assessment and CPUE analysis for the Campbell Island Rise for 2006
(New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2006/41, Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington,
New Zealand, 2006;
fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2006%20FARs/06_41_FAR.pdf).
S99. P. L. Horn, A. Dunn, Stock assessment of hake (Merluccius australis) on the Chatham
Rise for the 2006-07 fishing year (New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2007/44,
Ministry of Fisheries, Wellington, New Zealand, 2007;
fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2007%20FARs/07_44_FAR.pdf).
S100. P. L. Horn, Stock assessment of hake (Merluccius australis) in the Sub-Antarctic for the
2007-08 fishing year (New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2008/49, Ministry of
Fisheries, Wellington, New Zealand, 2008;
fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2008%20FARs/08_49_FAR.pdf).
S101. A. McKenzie, Standardised CPUE analysis and stock assessment of the west coast
trevally fishery (TRE 7) (New Zealand Fisheries Assessment Report 2008/44, Ministry of
Fisheries, Wellington, New Zealand, 2008;
fpcs.fish.govt.nz/science/documents//2008%20FARs/08_44_FAR.pdf).
S89.

43
S102. K. S. Bryer, W. B. Brodie, M. J. Morgan, An assessment of the American plaice stock in
NAFO Subarea 2 and Division 3K (Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Research
Document 2003/095, Fisheries and Oceans, Canada, 2003; www.dfompo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2000/PDF/2000_130e.pdf).
S.103.. A. M. Dwyer, M. J. Morgan, D. M. Parsons, B. P. Healey, An assessment of American
plaice in NAFO Div. 3LNO (NAFO SCR Doc. No. 07/56, Northwest Atlantic Fisheries
Organization, 2007; archive.nafo.int/open/sc/2007/scr07-056.pdf).S102.
S104. J. Brattey et al., Assessment of the cod (Gadus morhua) stock in NAFO Subdivision 3Ps in
October 2004 (Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Research Document 2004/083,
Fisheries and Oceans, Canada, 2004; www.dfompo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2004/RES2004_083_E.pdf).
S105. A. Fréchet et al., The status of cod in the Northern Gulf of St. Lawrence (3Pn, 4RS) in
2006 (Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Research Document 2007/068, Fisheries
and Oceans, Canada, 2007; www.dfompo.gc.ca/CSAS/Csas/DocREC/2007/RES2007_068_B.pdf).
S106. M. J. Morgan, E. F. Murphy, J. Brattey, An assessment of the cod stock in NAFO
Divisions 3NO (NAFO SCR Doc. No. 07/40, Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization,
2007; archive.nafo.int/open/sc/2007/scr07-040.pdf).
S107. B. P. Healey, J-C. Mahé, An assessment of Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius
hippoglossoides) in NAFO Subarea 2 and Divisions 3KLMNO (NAFO SCR Doc. No.
07/53, Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization, 2007;
archive.nafo.int/open/sc/2007/scr07-053.pdf).
S108. A. M. Á. de Melo, R. Duarte, D. Power, R. Alpoim, An ASPIC based assessment of
redfish in NAFO Divisions 3LN (NAFO SCR Doc. 07/38, Northwest Atlantic Fisheries
Organization, 2007; archive.nafo.int/open/sc/2007/scr07-038.pdf).
S109. M. Gibson, personal communication.
S110. Assessment of 19 Northeast Groundfish Stocks through 2007: Report of the 3rd
Groundfish Assessment Review Meeting (GARM III) (Northeast Fisheries Science Center
Reference Document 08-15, 2008;
www.nefsc.noaa.gov/nefsc/publications/crd/crd0815/crd0815.pdf).
S111. J. J. Hunt, B. Hatt, L. O’Brien, Population status of Eastern Georges Bank cod (unit
areas 5Zj,m) for 1978-2004 (Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Research Document
2003/096, Fish and Oceans, Canada, 2003, www.mar.dfompo.gc.ca/science/trac/documents/CSAS_Res_Doc_2003_096.pdf).
S112. P. C. F. Hurley, G. A. P. Black, J. E. Simon, R. K. Mohn, P. A. Comeau, Assessment of
the status of Division 4X/5Y haddock in 2003 (Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat
Research Document 2003/104, Fish and Oceans, Canada, 2003; www.dfompo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2003/RES2003_104_E.pdf).
S113. L. Van Eekhaute, S. Gavaris, J. Brodziak, Assessment of haddock on eastern Georges
Bank (Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Research Document 2003/076, Fish and
Oceans, Canada, 2003; www.dfompo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2003/RES2003_076_E.pdf).
S114. H. Stone, P. Perley, D. Clark, 2006 assessment of pollock in 4VWX and 5Zc (Canadian
Science Advisory Secretariat Research Document 2006/088, Fish and Oceans, Canada,
2006; www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2006/RES2006_088_e.pdf).

44
S115. 2006 stock assessment report for Atlantic menhaden (Atlantic Menhaden Technical
Committee, Atlantic Menhaden Management Board, 2006;
www.asmfc.org/speciesDocuments/menhaden/reports/stockAssessments/2006StockAsses
smentReport.pdf).
S116. S. Hoyle, A. Langley, J. Hampton, Stock assessment of albacore tuna in the South Pacific
Ocean (WCPFC-SC24-2008/SA-WP-8, Western and Central Pacific Fisheries
Commission, 2008; www.wcpfc.int/sc4/pdf/SC4-SAWP8%20%5BALB%20assessment%5D.pdf).
S117. A. Langley, J. Hampton, P. Kleiber, S. Hoyle, Stock assessment of bigeye tuna in the
Western and Central Pacific Ocean, including an analysis of management options
(WCPFC-SC24-2008/SA-WP-1 Rev.1, Western and Central Pacific Fisheries
Commission, 2008; www.wcpfc.int/sc4/pdf/SC4-SA-WP1rev.1%20[BET%20Assessment].pdf).
S118. A. Langley, J. Hampton, Stock assessment of skipjack tuna in the western and central
Pacific Ocean (WCPFC-SC4-2008/SA-WP-4 Rev.1, Western and Central Pacific
Fisheries Commission, 2008; www.wcpfc.int/sc4/pdf/SC4-SAWP4%20[SKJ%20Assessment]%20rev1.pdf).
S119. A. Langley, J. Hampton, P. Kleiber, S. Hoyle, Stock assessment of yellowfin tuna in the
western and central Pacific Ocean, including an analysis of management options
(WCPFC-SC3-SA SWG/WP-01, Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission,
2007; www.wcpfc.int/sc3/pdf/WCPFC-SC3%20SA-SWG%20WP-01.pdf).
S120. C. G. Irusta, L. L. D'Atri, M. Renzi, “Evaluación del estado del efectivo norte de 41 S de
la merluza (Merluccius hubssi) y estimación de la captura biológicamente aceptable
correspondiente al año 2008” (INIDEP Informe Técnico No. 32, Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Desarrollo Pesquero, Mar del Plata, Argentina, 2008).
S121. M. A. Renzi, B. A. Santos, M.F. Villarino, “Evaluación del estado del efectivo sur de 41
S de la merluza (Merluccius hubssi) y estimación de la captura biológicamente aceptable
correspondiente al año 2008” (INIDEP Informe Técnico No. 46, Instituto Nacional de
Investigación y Desarrollo Pesquero, Mar del Plata, Argentina, 2008).
S122. A. R. Guissi, O. C. Wohler, “Evaluación de la abundancia de merluza de cola
(Macruronus magellanicus) en el Atlántico Sudoccidental. Período 1985-2006.” (INIDEP
Informe Técnico No. 28, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo Pesquero, Mar
del Plata, Argentina, 2007).
S123. A. R. Guissi, O. C. Wohler, “Evaluación de la abundancia de polaca (Micromesistius
australis) en el Atlántico Sudoccidental. Período 1987-2007” (INIDEP Informe Técnico
No. 36, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo Pesquero, Mar del Plata,
Argentina, 2008).
S124. D. P. Swain et al. Assessment of the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence cod stock, March 2007
(Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat Research Document 2007/033, Fish and Oceans,
Canada, 2007; www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/csas/Csas/DocREC/2007/RES2007_033_b.pdf).
S125. B. Taylor, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery
2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority and CSIRO
Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 2, pp. 195-224.
S126. A. E. Punt, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery
2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority and CSIRO
Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 1, pp. 189-240.

45
S127. L. R. Little, K. Rowling, A. E. Punt, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern
Scalefish and Shark Fishery 2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries
Management Authority and CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart,
Australia, 2007), vol. 2, pp. 280-323.
S128. N. L. Klaer, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark
Fishery 2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority and
CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 2, pp. 415-438.
S129. S. Wayte, G. Fay, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark
Fishery 2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority and
CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 2, pp. 324-370.
S130. S. Wayte, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery
2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority and CSIRO
Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 1, pp. 431-449.
S131. J. Day, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark Fishery
2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority and CSIRO
Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 2, pp. 374-414.
S132. G. N. Tuck, A. E. Punt, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and
Shark Fishery 2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority
and CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 2, pp. 225242.
S133. N. L. Klaer, in Stock assessment for the Southern and Eastern Scalefish and Shark
Fishery 2006-2007, G. N. Tuck, Ed. (Australian Fisheries Management Authority and
CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Hobart, Australia, 2007), vol. 1, pp. 322-347.
S134. Stock assessment of red porgy off the southeastern United States: SEDAR update
assessment (Southeast Fisheries Science Center, 2006;
www.sefsc.noaa.gov/sedar/download/rp-aw-25May06.pdf?id=DOCUMENT).
S135. SEDAR 17 stock assessment report: South Atlantic Spanish mackerel (Southeast Fisheries
Science Center, 2008;
www.sefsc.noaa.gov/sedar/download/S17%20SM%20SAR%201.pdf?id=DOCUMENT).
S136. J. M. Casey, Fish Assemblages on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland (MSc thesis,
Memorial University of Newfoundland, 2000).
S137. H. P. Benoit, Swain, D.P., Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 65, 2088
(2008).
S138. D. Clark, B. Branton, OBIS Canada Digital Collections (2007).
S139. J. S. Collie, A. D. Wood, H. P. Jeffries, Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 65, 1352 (2008).
S140. D. Pauly, in Fish population dynamics J. A. Gulland, Ed. (Wiley, New York, 1988) pp.
329-348.
S141. I. C. Stobutzki et al., Fisheries Research 78, 130 (2006).

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to many colleagues and institutions for providing data to pursue this work.
Ecosystem models (EwE and Atlantis) were contributed by Cameron Ainsworth, Alida Bundy,
John Fields, Isaac Kaplan, Jason Link, Jodie Little, and Steve Mackinson.

46

Stock assessments were provided and entered by many, including the following: Anabela
Brandão, John Brattey, Paul Breen, Elizabeth Brooks, Doug Butterworth, Laurel Col, Patrick
Cordue, Nick Davies, Michelle de Decker, Karen Dwyer, Carryn de Moor, Jeff Fargo, Chris
Francis, Dan Fu, Mark Gibson, David Gilroy, Analía Giussi, John Hampton, Stuart Hanchet,
Peter Horn, Simon Hoyle, Gabriela Irusta, Chris Legault, Susan Johnston, Ralph Mayo, Andy
McKenzie, Mike Melnychuk, Joanne Morgan, Loretta O’Brien, Éva Plagányi, Renee
Prefontaine, Marta Renzi, Jake Schweigert, Alain Sinclair, Kate Stanton, Paul Starr, Ian Stewart,
Mark Terceiro, Doug Vaughn, John Walter, Sue Wigley, together with Marine and Coastal
Management, South Africa, and the CSIRO stock assessment group, Australia.
We thank the following people for contributing survey data to this project and for assisting in
interpreting the survey results: Diane Archambault, Hugues Benoît, Hugo Bourdages, Aaren
Ellsworth, Robert Foy, Robert Lauth, Nicholas Sagalkin, Doug Swain, Dan Urban and Mark
Wilkins; the surveys were conducted under the auspices of the following institutions: the
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, the Department of Fisheries and Oceans,
Canada, the Alaska Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Alaska Fisheries Science Center, the
Northeast Fisheries Science Center, the Northwest Fisheries Science Center, the National Marine
Fisheries Service, U.S.A., and the Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science,
U.K.
Our work was assisted greatly by the provision of data from FishBase: maximum length values
for species were provided by Rainer Froese, and for higher level taxa by Grace Pablico. Wade
Blanchard of the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University provided
comments and suggestions on the survey trend analyses.
Catch data and fisheries access agreement data were provided by the Pew-funded Sea Around Us
Project. Thanks to Wilf Swartz who compiled the data plotted in Figure 5B.
Julia Baum and Olaf Jensen acknowledge financial support by the David H. Smith Conservation
Research Fellowship Program.

View publication stats

