See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266333814

3/29/06 DRAFT Reconciling Fishing with Biodiversity: A Holistic Recovery
Strategy for Paciﬁc Sea Turtles
Article
CITATIONS

READS

2

45

6 authors, including:
Dale Squires
Southwest Fisheries Science Center
193 PUBLICATIONS 6,722 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Dale Squires on 01 July 2015.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

3/29/06

DRAFT
Reconciling Fishing with Biodiversity:
A Holistic Recovery Strategy for Pacific Sea Turtles
by

Peter H. Dutton
NOAA Fisheries
La Jolla, California, USA
Dale Squires
NOAA Fisheries
La Jolla, California, USA

1. Introduction
No single conservation approach by itself has worked to recover endangered Pacific sea
turtles. Populations still continue to decline. A variety of factors have contributed to this
continued decline. If policy addresses only some of these multifaceted factors, and fails
to take a holistic approach by tackling all sources of mortality, population recovery is
likely to be delayed at best or even reversed.
Lack of information has made it difficult to evaluate management options in a rigorous
scientific manner, and this has led to controversy over the best approach to take in order
to recover depleted populations of sea turtles. Given this uncertainty, there is a need to
integrate a broad suite of approaches into a holistic strategy that in the short run will
prevent extinction of populations that are clearly in crisis, and in the long run, lead to
recovery.
Three broad components need to be brought together into this holistic recovery strategy.
First, the recovery strategy must address the entire life cycle, migration range and
habitat, and users and sources of anthropogenic mortality in the Pacific Commons.
Second, multilateral and cooperative conservation efforts among nations and other
parties are required. Third, a comprehensive conservation framework is necessary that
is a mixture of biological, economic, political, and legal conservation measures.
This chapter addresses the requirements of an integrated, multilateral recovery strategy
that addresses multiple sources of sea turtle mortality at different life stages in the face
of continued fishing by large-scale, small-scale, and artisanal fleets, and explores a
variety of policy tools that can be used. We consider the myriad sources of mortality at
different life-cycle stages and evaluate the approaches that can address these different
sources. We discuss the roles played by harvesters and consumers of sea food, and the
provision of economic incentives where practicable to bring about recovery rather than
through direct fiat or laws. Positive economic incentives help contribute toward a selfenforcing, cooperative recovery strategy.
This chapter is organized as follows. The next section, Section 2, discusses the different
issues involved, including sources of mortality, migration and jurisdiction, distribution of
costs and benefits and incentives for conservation, fisheries-related conservation, and
opportunities for a more holistic approach to recovery, and then examines the Kemp’s
ridley as a case study in bilateral conservation. Section 3 examines in greater detail the
different sources of mortality for Pacific leatherbacks, olive ridleys, loggerheads, and
East Pacific green turtles. Section 4 examines economic incentives important for the
holistic approach to the recovery of Pacific sea turtles. Section 5 discusses at-sea
conservation measures, including performance and technology standards, as one
component of the holistic recovery strategy. Section 6 discusses mitigation measures
that can be coupled with performance and technology standards as an additional
conservation component of the holistic approach to population recovery. Section 7
evaluates taxes or fees levied on producers and consumers as an economic measure
for conservation. Section 8 discusses the role of a Pacific conservation fund for sea
turtles. Section 9 returns to production standards to examine this important conservation
measure in greater detail. Section 10 discusses marketable turtle mortality limits as a
transferable property right or wildlife use right. Section 11 examines trade restrictions as
a policy “stick” to help enforce conservation measures. Section 12 looks at eco-labeling

1

and environmental product certification as a policy “carrot” to create positive economic
incentives for conservation. Section 13 raises the issue of direct and indirect
conservation measures, including direct payments to local communities for conservation
concessions. Section 14 discusses side payments that have both distributive and
strategic functions as a means of transferring some of the benefits gained from
population recovery to those who bear the costs associated with population recovery,
where benefits are often diffuse across populations in higher-income countries and costs
are often localized in populations of lower-income countries. The last section, Section
15, offers concluding remarks.
2. Issues
Sources of mortality
There is a triad of primary sources of anthropogenic sea turtle mortality, those centered
on nesting grounds, large-scale commercial fishing fleets operating wholly or in part on
the high seas, and small-scale and artisanal fishing operating in coastal waters.
Sea turtles and their eggs are prized worldwide for human consumption. Furthermore,
their oils are used for lubricants and ingredients in cosmetics, and their shells for jewelry
and eyeglass frames. Nonetheless, mass slaughter of turtles and plunder of their nests
have been and remain a prime cause of population declines (National Research Council,
1990). Encroachment of human populations into coastal habitats further contributes to
population declines by degrading nesting beaches. Harvesting of sea turtles for
subsistence or commercial purposes and incidental mortality in commercial fishing and
other such activities further diminish sea turtle populations. There continues to be
considerable uncertainty over the status of key stocks and the extent to which bycatch in
various fisheries has, and continues to contribute to declines in Pacific sea turtles (FAO
2004; Abreu-Grobois, this issue).
In general, impacts on nesting beaches tend to threaten all the species in similar ways.
Egg harvesting and nesting habitat destruction have been important sources of mortality
for all species of Pacific sea turtles (NMFS & USFWS 1998a-d, see Abreu-Grobois this
issue). Fisheries, however, tend to affect different species of sea turtles to varying
degrees as a result of different life histories, and furthermore, different fisheries will
affect each species in different ways. Hawksbills appear to be rarely caught in either
pelagic fisheries (Wetherall et al 1993, McCracken 2000) or coastal fisheries (Robins
1995, Poiner & Harris 1996, Alfaro et al., 2003). The main hazard for hawksbills in the
marine environment has been commercial harvesting for “bekko” or tortoiseshell (Meylan
& Donnelly 1999). Olive ridleys have also been subjected to direct commercial harvest
for leather in the Pacific coastal waters of Mexico. This species, however, is also
present in pelagic waters, and therefore caught in both pelagic net and longline fisheries
and coastal net, line and trawl fisheries. Green turtles tend to inhabit coastal waters and
embayments, so that they are more commonly caught in fisheries that operate in these
habitats, and are not typically taken in pelagic longline fisheries. Loggerheads and
leatherbacks are the species that pelagic net and longline fisheries most commonly
interact with on the high seas, although both these species also occur in coastal waters.
Later in this chapter we delve into more detail into specific threats for the species that
are primarily affected by incidental take in pelagic and coastal fisheries. A more
extensive review of threats is provided in chapter X by Abreu-Grobois.

2

Migration and jurisdiction
Sea turtles are migratory, weaving their way in and out of Exclusive Economic Zones of
different nations and through the high seas. Breeding habitat can lie in one nation and
their developing and foraging habitat in another nation’s waters or in the high seas
where this is little or no governance.1 2 This creates trans-boundary resource and
jurisdictional problems, since there is no central authority to organize and enforce
conservation. Property rights are absent or insufficiently well developed in Exclusive
Economic Zones and the high seas for this Pacific common resource.3 As a result of the
trans-boundary and migratory nature of sea turtles, conservation strategies are required
to tackle the trans-boundary issue and avert this Pacific “Tragedy of the Commons.”
Conservation and recovery limited to unilateral measures by individual nations are likely
to fall short of the required conservation level, which instead requires cooperative and
multilateral conservation, involving the efforts of multiple nations acting in tandem.
Because there is no central authority to organize and enforce conservation, selfenforcing and voluntary arrangements are required.
Distribution of costs and benefits: incentives for conservation
The benefits of sea turtle conservation and recovery are diffuse across entire
populations, but because costs are concentrated on particular groups, there is a
misalignment of incentives for conservation and recovery. The benefits are largely
enjoyed by populations in high-income, developed countries (or high-income groups in
developing countries), but the costs are largely borne by lower-income local
communities, many of which are marginal to their societies. A potential “free rider”
problem arises in such instances, in that there are incentives to “free ride” on the
conservation and recovery efforts for this Pacific common resource, including money
paid by others. (A free rider is a party or person who receives the benefit of a good or
service but avoids paying for it. This includes nonparticipation in international
environmental agreements but nonetheless enjoyment of the benefits.) That is, there are
few incentives to pay one’s fair share. These “free rider” problems can be overcome by
collective action, increasing participation in cooperative, multilateral conservation, and by
actual compensation from the gainers to the losers or those bearing the costs in the form
of side payments for the conservation measures.
Fisheries-related conservation
1

This creates a transboundary resource externality, where the outcome that any one country can
realize depends not only on its own actions, but also on what others do. Thus, there is
interdependence among nations.
2

Habitat, as defined by the Memorandum of Understand for the Conservation and Management
of Sea Turtles and their Habitats of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia, “…means all those
aquatic and terrestrial environments which marine turtles use at any stage of their life cycle.”
3

A common resource, often called open-access resources by the property rights school of
thought, are rival (depletable) but not excludable (one individual or group exploiting the resource
cannot exclude another from exploitation).

3

In some instances, fisheries management has attempted to conserve Pacific sea turtles.
One solution has been to simply shut down commercial, large-scale fisheries, many of
which fish wholly or partly on the high seas. But with trans-boundary turtles migrating
across exclusive economic zones and through the high seas, fish formerly caught in the
fishery are likely to be caught by other nations and imported back into the nation with the
closed fishery – creating what is called production and trade leakages -- and little or no
net conservation gain is likely for sea turtles. Vessels might also reflag or shift their
operations to other fisheries that remain open, also a form of production leakage, and
export their fish or shrimp to the now open market – a trade leakage. Shutting down all
or most longline and gillnet fisheries in the Pacific plugs these production and trade
leakages, but this may not come to pass or could require considerable time – time which
vulnerable sea turtle populations simply do not have.4 5 In this instance, fishing and sea
turtle mortality will continue, which then begs the question of the best conservation and
recovery approach to take in a world of continued fishing.
In this scenario of continued fishing, the bycatch and mortality of sea turtles in
commercial, large-scale fisheries would be reduced as much as possible by adopting
appropriate fishing practices and gear technology standards. Nonetheless, even reduced
mortality from commercial, large-scale fishing may be insufficient to induce the recovery
of sea turtle populations, since there are other important sources of mortality. The
reduction of sea turtle populations to critically low numbers aggravates and compounds
the problem of reducing sea turtle mortality from fishing alone. Instead, a broader-based
and integrated recovery approach is required that tackles all of the sources of sea turtle
mortality and at critical stages in the life cycle and which recognizes the entire suite of
existing biological, ecological, political, legal, economic, and social factors that need to
be faced. The several decades required to reach sexual maturity compounds the
difficulty faced.
One important fisheries source of sea turtle mortality remains, the artisanal and smallscale commercial longline and gillnet fisheries of the Pacific. Many of these fisheries
operate off of nesting grounds, foraging areas, or in the migration paths of sea turtles.
The extent of sea turtle mortality from these fisheries remains unknown, but the critical
role of these fisheries and complexity of this issue are becoming increasingly evident.
Reduced mortality of sea turtles in these fisheries will have to be directly addressed for
the holistic approach to become comprehensive and populations to recover. Reducing
mortality in these fisheries is likely to prove more complex than in large-scale fisheries or
4

For example, the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC) vessel data base indicates
1,156 IATTC-authorized longline vessels in the Eastern Pacific Ocean from 12 nations as follows:
23 from USA, 140 from Taiwan, 1 from Peru, 53 from Panama, 9 from Mexico, 177 from Korea,
516 from Japan, 14 from France, 125 from Spain, 20 from Ecuador, 1 from Costa Rica, and 77
from China. In addition, there are longline vessels fishing in the Eastern Pacific Ocean from
nations that are not members of the IATTC.
5

The Pacific high seas drift gillnet fishery was shut down by the United Nations in the 1980s.
However, only a handful of nations were involved and it is questionable whether the extensive
longline fleets of the entire Pacific can all be effectively shut down. A more likely scenario is
termination of some fleets and continued, and perhaps even expanded, longlining by the
remaining fleets, which leads to production and trade leakages and continued sea turtle mortality.
Moreover, there still remains the source of sea turtle mortality from shrimp trawling.

4

nesting site protection for a number of reasons, including participants, which are often
among the most disenfranchised in their societies, are geographically dispersed, large in
numbers. These countries are lower-income and developing, and financial resources are
simply unavailable or limited to address this important source of sea turtle mortality.
Opportunities for a more holistic approach to recovery
In contrast to conservation challenges of many marine mammals, such as dolphins or
whales, sea turtles offer a unique opportunity to increase population levels through a
broad-based recovery strategy that includes directly addressing mortality on nesting
grounds. Thus rather than a defensive strategy simply focusing on reducing at-sea
mortality from commercial fishery interactions, a recovery strategy can become
proactive. It can widen its approach to include measures that directly increase the
population and address all sources of mortality throughout all stages of the life cycle in a
holistic recovery strategy.
A unique life history makes sea turtle populations vulnerable to several sources of
mortality at critical stages in their life, which is aggravated by the several decades
required to reach sexual maturity for many species. Yet, this unique life history also
creates opportunities for conservation that simply do not exist for other marine species,
such as whales and dolphins.
Saving the Kemp’s Ridley: a bilateral case study
One example of a more comprehensive approach occurred in the Atlantic with the
Kemp’s ridley, once the most endangered sea turtle on the planet, that now appears to
be on the road to recovery. The Kemp’s ridley is unique, in that almost all the critical life
history stages occur within the territories of two countries, Mexico and USA, and so the
transboundary issues could be addressed under a bi-lateral framework. Nevertheless,
there are important lessons from this case, since recovery only began to occur once a
broad suite of measures were put in place.
There has been a bilateral, joint program between the governments of Mexico and the
United States for the Kemp’s ridley. Mexico initiated conservation efforts in 1966 at
Rancho Nuevo, Tamaulipas, the species’ only nesting area; however, the population
continued to decline for the next two decades6 The bilateral program was established in
6

Based on an amateur film by Andrés Herrera in 1947, Hildebrand (1963) and Carr (1963) guessed that
40,000 turtles nested at Rancho Nuevo (Márquez, 1999). No data were available until 1965, at which point
the biggest arribada numbered less than 5,000 turtles. In 1973, the largest arribada contained only 200
individuals. Despite beach protection, this number continued to drop for the next 20 years, by which time
total nestings for the season were only numbered in the hundredsSurveys conducted between 1978 and
1988 indicated an average of about 800 nests per year, declining at about 14 nests per year, to an all time
low in the late 1980s (Marquez et al., 1999). The total number of nesting females may have been as low as
350 on beaches where tens of thousands of Kemp'
s ridley used to nest
This initial failure to respond to protection indicates that recruitment was jeopardized by prolonged near-total
harvest of eggs and shrimp trawling in the Gulf of Mexico, the primary juvenile and sub-adult habitat and the
only habitat of adults (Pritchard). In 1990, the mortality from shrimp trawling was estimated to lie between
500 and 5,000. Collectively, other trawl fisheries, passive gear fisheries, and entanglement fisheries were
estimated in 1990 to yield between 50-500 deaths a year. Deaths due to dredging and collisions with boats
were estimated in 1990 to lead to a further 5-50 deaths every year. Additional sources of anthropogenic

5

1978, and by the late-1980s the decline stabilized, and since then this species appears
to be on the road to recovery. It now appears that this early intervention pioneered by
scientists at the Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Biologicos Pesqueras was
important in preventing the imminent extinction of the Kemp’s ridely; however, the recent
signs of recovery are generally acknowledged to be the result of the expanded bilateral
effort that provided additional resources and a forum to craft and implement a broader
recovery strategy. This bilateral program has involved both formal and informal
collaboration between government agencies, including the Instituto Nacional de la
Pesca (INP), U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (USFWS), the U.S. National Marine Fisheries
Service (NMFS), and the U.S. National Park Service, and private institutions, which
include the Gladys Porter Zoo and HEART (Help Endangered Animals Ridley Turtle).
Bilateral conservation programs have focused on the nesting process and have included
beach and nest protection, establishment of additional nesting areas to extend the range
and reduce risks, headstarting programs, and implementation of measures to reduce
fishing mortality7. Much of this collaborative work has been done under a formal bilateral
Cooperative Agreement between the NMFS and INP, known as MEXUS-Golfo.
The Kemp’s ridley program is a success story that has served as a model for sea turtle
conservation, providing the framework for a similar approach currently underway with the
Pacific leatherback under the MEXUS-Pacifico Cooperative Agreement between NMFS
and INP. However, unlike the Kemp’s ridley, the leatherback is pelagic and highly
migratory, and its nesting and foraging habitat encompass the entire ocean basin.8
Clearly, the bilateral approach that appears to have been successful for Kemp’s ridley is
inadequate to address recovery in the case of the severely depleted nesting population
in Pacific Mexico.
While mortality of eggs and adult female leatherbacks has been reduced as a result of
bi-lateral (US-Mexico) conservation efforts since 1995, the population continues to
decline. Although progress has been made on protection of nesting populations, current
efforts in the Pacific are limited by insufficient financial resources and competing
economic interests from land development. In Mexico, a dedicated group of people from
private and governmental institutions have undertaken an effort to protect nesting
leatherbacks and their eggs. However this work is logistically challenging, and there is
insufficient money to implement a completely effective program, so at best 45-50% of
the nests are afforded protection each year. In addition, critical nesting habitat is being
encroached by land development; for instance in Costa Rica, one of the most important
nesting areas comprises 3 beaches in Guanacaste. A national Park was established
mortality were estimated in 1990 to come from oil-rig removal, intentional harvests, entrainment by electric
power plants, ingestion of plastics and debris, and from accumulation of toxic substances, especially from
ingested petroleum residues. Mortality also occurs from human and non-human predation of eggs in nests,
predation of hatchlings and juveniles by crabs, birds, fish, and mammals. The nesting population reached a
low in the mid-1980s and in the last few years has begun to modestly and steadily increase (Marquez et al
2001)
7

Turtle Excluder Devices were implemented in Gulf of Mexico to eliminate sea turtle mortality in shrimp
trawls.
8

Recent studies using satellite telemetry and molecular genetics have shown that leatherbacks migrate from
their nesting beaches in Papua, Indonesia to foraging areas found across the North Pacific as far as waters
off US West coast. In the eastern Pacific adult females migrate from nesting beaches in Mexico and Costa
Rica to the southeast Pacific to forage off the coast of Peru and Chile.

6

(Las Baulas) recently to protect most of this nesting area, however, the land (high dune
area inland) adjoining the nesting beaches is not protected, and the habitat has been
encroached by development of luxury homes. The Costa Rican government is
interested in embarking on an ambitious program to purchase land, however does not
have the funds available to implement this immediately. With the eastern Pacific
leatherback at such critically low numbers, it is unlikely that the present level of beach
protection will be sufficient to reverse the population decline.
3. Different Sources of Pacific Sea Turtle Mortality
Sea turtles are subject to mortality at every stage in their life cycle from both natural and
anthropogenic sources. The relative impact of these sources of mortality may be
different for each species, and in many cases is unknown. Mortality sources include
directed take of adult turtles and harvest of their eggs on nesting beaches; directed take
of juveniles and adults on their foraging areas; indirect take as a result of fishing activity,
land development, human encroachment and pollution; “natural take” from predation,
disease, and environmental pertubation (storms, floods, etc); and finally largely unknown
effects from long-term global climactic and environmental change that may include longterm natural cycles (Southern Oscillation; global warming).
Sea turtles have existed for 30-100 million years, and have evolved to withstand high
mortality of eggs and hatchlings. They are long-lived and have high reproductive output,
producing tremendous quantities of eggs over their lifetimes. In general therefore, sea
turtles populations can, in theory, withstand a high level of take of eggs, as long as
survival of later stages remains high (e.g. later juvenile through adult). However, the
wholesale harvest of eggs that occurred when this practice became commercialized this
century has rendered populations vulnerable to the other impacts in the marine
environment, and most likely set the stage for the rapid catastrophic declines that we are
now seeing in some populations.
3.1 Pacific Leatherbacks
This catastrophic population decline has been well documented in the Malaysian
leatherback population that nested in Terenganu, once one of the largest rookeries in
the Pacific, that now is all but extinct (Chan & Liew 1996). For almost 50 years every
egg laid at this beach was harvested, and in the late 1970’s there was a sudden decline
in numbers of nesters from several thousands, to just two or three nesting annually since
the 1990’s. There were attempts to reverse this decline by protection measures (harvest
quotas, beach hatcheries), but these appear to have been too little, too late. In addition,
habitat degradation on the nesting beaches now appears to have contributed to the
inability of these measures to be effective at increasing hatchling production. The extent
that impacts at sea contributed to the Malaysian population collapse is unknown, but
clearly the demographic erosion caused by the total harvest of eggs over at least one
leatherback generation (9-20+ years), would have meant that any take of adults had a
relatively larger impact, than had there been a large pool of younger generations to
sustain this population.
This may be a pattern that is repeating itself to some extent for leatherbacks in the
eastern Pacific, although this is not as well documented. The nesting populations in
Mexico and Costa Rica have recently collapsed, most likely as a result of convergence

7

of several factors; mortality caused by the high seas driftnet fisheries of the 1980’s,
coastal artisanal gillnet fisheries in South America into the 1990’s, and a long history of
intensive egg harvest beginning in the 1970’s, killing of females on nesting beaches, and
possibly environmental factors that we have yet to understand. It is possible that by the
time high-seas driftnetting was banned in the 1980’s, the damage had been done to the
breeding population, as harvest of eggs continued unabated until relatively recently
(1990’s-see Dutton et al. 2002). Take of eggs has been significantly reduced now in
Costa Rica and Mexico, but with the breeding population reduced to such critically low
numbers, the take of any leatherbacks from this breeding stock will have a relatively
large negative impact on recovery than for populations with a healthy pool of younger
generations on their way to maturity. There is great controversy and uncertainty over
the extent of impacts of longlining on leatherbacks. Although historically gillnetting and
drift netting may have been more destructive to turtles than longlining9, (turtles have a
high probability of drowning in nets, and may have a better chance of survival if
entangled or caught on longlines), the cumulative effect of low levels of mortality most
likely now plays a relatively greater role in preventing the recovery of these species,
(despite reduced mortality on the nesting beaches), since there are now so few turtles.
In addition to the indirect take of leatherbacks in high seas fisheries, illegal take of
leatherbacks continues in the subsistence fisheries in Peru (Alfaro et al., In Press).
Perhaps the largest leatherback population that remains in the Pacific comprises
rookeries that occur in Papua and Papua New Guinea in the western Pacific. While
there is uncertainty over historic status of this population, data from recent surveys do
not indicate that the Papua population has collapsed in the way that the Malaysian and
eastern Pacific populations have (Hitipeuw, 2003). Also, there is not a history of whole
scale commercial harvest of eggs. There is however, directed take of reproductive
adults on foraging grounds around Indonesia (Suarez and Starbird 1996, Hitipeuw, pers
comm.), feral pig predation, beach erosion and human subsistence harvest of eggs in
Papua and PNG. In addition, evidence suggests that leatherbacks from these western
Pacific stocks migrate to foraging and developmental areas across the North Pacific and
off the west coast of North America (Dutton et al.), and it is these turtles that are caught
incidentally in high seas longline fisheries and coastal driftnet fisheries. It appears that
these last remaining western Pacific populations have so far been better able to
withstand the impacts at sea than the Malaysian, and eastern Pacific populations,
perhaps because the absence of intense historic egg harvest in Papua has allowed
somewhat of a demographic buffer. Given the broad suite of mortality factors affecting
this population, long-term decline of these populations may be inevitable; however, the
fact that there still relatively large numbers of turtles nesting means there is better
opportunity for population recovery through enactment of a broad suite of conservation
measures, and in particular for aggressive beach conservation measures to be effective
(as opposed to the case of Terenganu, where it was too late).
3.2 Olive Ridleys
The eastern Pacific Olive ridley “arribada” populations have increased dramatically in the
last decade, since closure of the nearshore fishery for olive ridleys in 1990 (Marquez et
9

See NOAA-NMFS Endangered Species Act Section 7 Consultation 2002 Biological Opinion for
more detailed synopsis of fishery and non-fishery related take and mortality of sea turtles.
Includes estimates of take and kills for Pacific longline fisheries.

8

al…). Prior to that closure, large-scale commercial harvest of eggs and directed
commercial take of juveniles and adults for leather were the primary sources of mortality
that led to a decline in the nesting populations. The large-scale commercial harvest of
turtles occurred exclusively in Mexican EEZ, and appears to have dwarfed other sources
of mortality. Furthermore, this fishery appears to have targeted sub-adults, effectively
removing animals from the population before they had had a chance to breed. The
dramatic and rapid recovery of this population following cessation of this mortality
probably occurred because there were sufficient hatchlings and juveniles recruiting into
the population to allow recovery once this pressure point on a crucial life stage was
removed. Presently illegal harvest of eggs and incidental take in pelagic longline
fisheries, and coastal gillnet fisheries, artisenal fisheries throughout central and South
America, and trawl fisheries are primary sources of mortality. There is a legal harvest of
eggs in Costa Rica at Playa Ostional carried out by the local community that has been
acclaimed as a rare example of rational use. The harvest is carefully controlled by
stakeholders, and takes advantage of millions of eggs that are laid during the fisrt
“arribada” or mass nesting of olive ridleys each year. These eggs would all be destroyed
by seasonally poor beach conditions and by the second arribada, where tens of
thousands of turtles dig up and destroy the nests from the first arribada before they have
had a chance to hatch. Revenues from the sale of eggs in part go towards conservation
effort to ensure success of the second arribada, the rationale being that the first arribada
would have been destroyed.
3.3 Loggerheads
In the North Pacific, loggerheads nest almost exclusively in Japan, and these stocks
have declined greatly. Sources of mortality include human encroachment and egg
harvest on nesting beaches; incidental take in coastal fisheries (which take larger
juveniles and adults; incidental capture in high seas fisheries all across the North Pacific
(longline, drift/gillnet), and massive mortality due to incidental and directed take in
artisanal and small-scale commercial fisheries operating in areas where juvenile feeding
aggregations occur off Baja California, Mexico10. In the Southern hemisphere, the
primary nesting beaches occur on the Southern Great Barrier Reef, Australia, and this
stock has declined greatly over the last 30 years (Chaloupka and Limpus 2001).
Sources of mortality include drowning in Australian otter trawl fisheries, feral fox
predation of eggs in the 1960’s and 1970’s, and incidental capture in longline fisheries
operating in the South Pacific including in the southeast Pacific (Alfaro et al., in press;
also see Chaloupka 2003).
3.4 East Pacific green turtles
Eastern Pacific populations that nest in Mexico have declined considerably, despite
ongoing beach conservation that began in the 1970’s. Historic sources of mortality
included harvest of eggs and directed take of breeding adults near nesting beaches,
which have been largely reduced following legislation and conservation, although some
level of illegal take occurs. The primary source of mortality has recently been identified
as massive illegal take of juveniles and adults at foraging grounds around Baja California
(Nichols et al, 2000), and it is likely that this mortality has negated conservation efforts
on the nesting beaches and continues to prevent recovery. Since green turtles are
10

See NOAA-NMFS 2002 BiOp for details of loggerhead take and kills in Pacific.

9

largely coastal foragers, they are also caught incidentally in trawl and coastal artisanal
fisheries throughout Mexico, Central and South America (see NOAA-NMFS 2002).
4. Economic Incentives
Adverse economic incentives threaten sea turtle populations (Conservation and
Management Plan, MOU).
Market-based approaches to environmental protection are premised on the idea that it is
possible to confront private firms, individuals, and even other levels of government with
the same kinds of incentives they face in markets for labor, capital, and raw materials –
that is prices that force them to address all costs and benefits associated with
consumption and production, even if not presently captured by market values. The
rationale for market-based approaches is thus to try to put the powerful advantages of
markets to work in service to the environment.
An agreement on sea turtle conservation should produce for its parties a favorable
benefit-cost ratio or else it may either never enter into law or collapse (Barrett 1998).
Reducing sea turtle mortality in general, or even achieving a prescribed overall level of
mortality, that is cost-effective raises the benefit-cost ratio. Performance and/or
countries. Mitigation measures will necessarily require investments in the developing
countries where almost all of the nesting beaches are located and where an important
source of mortality from harvests of eggs and adults is found. As discussed above, this
developing country technology standards will have to be negotiated for both developed
and developing participation does not necessarily mean that the developing countries
need to pay for all of these conservation measures. Broadening participation is not to
redistribute costs so much as to lower the total costs and raise the total benefits of
conservation, since the marginal mortality reduction may be higher and marginal cost of
implementation may be lower in these countries. The Montreal Protocol capped
emissions of ozone-depleting substances in developing countries, and these countries
did not have to pay to stay within these limits; instead, the incremental costs of their
compliance were paid by the developed countries. Broadening participation to
developing countries also raises the benefits and thereby the benefit-cost ratio. The
problems of non-compliance and free-riding would at the same time be eased, since the
incentives to deviate in these ways would be reduced.

5. At-Sea Measures: Performance and Technology Standards for Responsible Fishing
Performance standards directly address the issue of sea turtle mortality through limiting
the incidental take and mortality of sea turtles in different fisheries, including pelagic
longlining or drift gillnetting and shrimp trawling, or direct takes through small-scale noncommercial and commercial activities. Dolphin Mortality Limits used in the International
Dolphin Conservation Program or caps on emissions of greenhouse gases in the Kyoto
Protocol are prominent international examples.
Technology standards refer to mandatory design and equipment requirements and
includes operating standards. An important example of technology standards aimed at

10

reducing the incidental take of sea turtles include turtle excluder devices (TEDs) with
shrimp trawling.
Unlike TEDs, there are no long-time, well-established technological fixes as yet that
allow fishing without sea turtle mortality for the longline and gill net fisheries. However,
recent research using circle hooks, various baiting techniques, and the substitution of
mackerel for squid as bait show great promise in this regard (Watson et al. 2003). Up to
now, the approaches used to mitigate sea turtle mortality in longline fisheries have
depended primarily on time-area closures and procedures to remove hooks and line
(using specially designed line-cutters and de-hookers) and resuscitate turtles in order to
enhance post-release survival11.
The Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Marine
Turtles and their Habitats of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia’s Conservation and
Management Plan includes a provision to “Mitigate Threats and Bycatch,” by reducing
…the incidental capture and mortality of marine turtles in the course of fishing activities
to ensure that any incidental take is sustainable through regulation of fisheries and
through development and implementation of measures such as turtle excluder devices
and seasonal or spatial closure of waters.”
In order for a technology standard aimed at lowering sea turtle takes and mortality to be
effective there must be a transparent monitoring system, not only to verify compliance
with the technology standards, but also to quantify the sea turtle bycatch and
scientifically evaluate the effectiveness of the measures in reducing bycatch mortality.
Presently, most fisheries in the Pacific do not have observer programs in place to collect
information on sea turtle bycatch, and this lack of information in itself forms an
impediment to sea turtle recovery. There is also often a fear on the part of fishers,
industry and governments that reporting this information will encourage efforts to shut
down fisheries, and this too, is an impediment to establishing transparent and effective
monitoring. Provision of incentives to participate in standardized and verifiable
monitoring programs would greatly enhance efforts to develop and implement effective
measures to reduce at-sea mortality of sea turtles.
Performance standards tend to require cooperation among nations, rather than simply
coordination of activities (Barrett 2003, in press). The use of Dolphin Mortality Limits is
implemented through a formal international environmental agreement, the International
Dolphin Conservation Program. Similarly, turtle mortality limits would require real
cooperation among nations to determine the overall turtle mortality limits and allocation
among nations, develop a compliance system through an observer or other program,
and other such factors.
Technology standards, in contrast, tend to require coordination rather than the more
demanding cooperation among nations (Barrett 2003, in press). Thus it is often the case
that technology standards are easier to implement than performance standards. For
example, with TEDs, a technology standard, nations do not have to actually cooperate.
Instead nations simply adopt TEDs and coordinate their technical designs, and
compliance is far easier to verify. International environmental agreements based on
performance standards may thus tend to be comparatively narrow but deep and in
11

See NOAA-NMFS Observer Manual for Hawaii-based Longline Fishery; NOAA Tech Report on
NED Experiments.

11

contrast, international agreements built on technology standards tend to be
comparatively more broad but shallower and easier to involve the cooperation of
comparatively more nations.
6. Mitigation
Performance standards or technology standards can be coupled with mitigation
measures to contribute to a holistic approach to recovery of sea turtle populations that
together limit net emissions or mortality.12 13 For example, the Kyoto Protocol provides
allowances for “sinks” – credits for the absorption of carbon dioxide by forests, cropland
management, and re-vegetation (Barrett 2003). These “sinks” mitigate the emission of
greenhouse gasses through the sequestration of CO2 (sucking CO2 out of the
atmosphere through growing trees, storage in the soils and oceans.). The Clean
Development Mechanism for the Kyoto Protocol, which allows an Annex I country to
mitigate its emissions by undertaking abatement within a non-Annex I country (Barrett
2003).14 Within the domestic United States, the Endangered Species Act allows for
mitigation to counter environmental degradation. For example, timber companies in the
southern U.S. are allowed to purchase timber lands with sufficiently high densities of
nesting sites for a listed woodpecker (red-cockaded woodpecker) to satisfy the
Endangered Species Act requirements, i.e. to serve as a mitigation measure, which
allows harvests of timber from other lands with lower densities of woodpecker nesting
sites (Heal 2000).15 In the USA, the new policy of Wetlands Mitigation Banking (WMB)
focuses on curtailing wetlands loss and regaining acres (Fernandez 1998). The WMB
policy encourages protection and rehabilitation of wetlands as a precondition for
developing other areas. In order to obtain permission to develop a different wetlands
area, a developer is required to have credits from investment in the completed
12

Mitigation projects are sometimes called “shadow projects” in the sustainable development
literature (Hanley, Shogren, and White 1997,Hanley and Spash 1993). These are projects or
policies designed to augment then stock of natural capital (in this case sea turtles) to counter
reductions in the stock of natural capital from a specified collection (portfolio) of projects or
policies. The idea is to impose either a “weak” or “strong” sustainability constraint as a rule for
sustainable development. In its weak form, the discounted sum of environmental costs must be
no greater than the discounted sum of offsetting benefits over the time period in question. In the
strong form, not only is the total natural capital stock non-declining, but the environmental costs
are no greater than environmental benefits in each time period, a more restrictive condition. In
addition, it recognizes some elements of “critical” natural capital such as biodiversity. The
definition of weak sustainability corresponds to “favorable conservation status,” of the
Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Marine Turtles and
their Habitats of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia.
13

Recent theoretical literature on the potential fo transferable development rights or biodiversity
mitigation include Cervigni (1993), Chomitz (2003), Gra l et al. (2002), and Panayotou (1974).

14

For example, Barrett (2003, p. 380) observes that a US company might convert a power station
in China from coal to natural gas, claiming credit for the associated savings in greenhouse gas
emissions. Annex I countries face an emission ceiling and Annex II countries do not face an
emission ceiling. (Annex I countries are the industrial countries listed in the original climate
convention that preceded the Kyoto Protocol, the Framework Convention on Climate Change,
which was signed by over 150 countries at the Rio Earth Summit in June 1992.)
15

See also Bean (1993), Olson, Murphy, Thornton (1993), Robert (1999), and Welch (1995).

12

rehabilitation of a WMB site. The developer is allowed to use these credits in exchange
for permission to develop other wetlands. Restoration activity is required prior to further
development.16 17 For example, a coastal wetlands (lagoon) in San Diego County was
restored by the Port of Long Beach to mitigate a loss in wetlands that occurred when the
port was expanded.
Sea turtles provide a unique opportunity for mitigation programs because sea turtles
return to nesting sites to lay eggs, thereby providing a focal point for mitigation.
Conservation measures to protect the turtles, sites, eggs, and hatchlings can serve to
actively increase the sea turtle population beyond that which would otherwise occur in
the absence of such conservation policies (Dutton, Sarti, Márquez, and Squires, 2002;
Troeng and Rankin, 2004; Balazs and Chaloupka, 2004; Dutton et al., In prep). In short,
depending on the program design, mitigation measures, as part of a population recovery
program addressing all sources of sea turtle mortality, can actually create a net
increase in turtles, even after explicitly accounting for uncertainty.18
Mitigation projects can be directly established between developing and developed
countries.19 Both the Montreal and Kyoto Protocols established a mechanism that could
support mitigation - emission reductions in ozone-depleting or greenhouse gasses -- in
developing countries, through the Multilateral Fund for the Montreal Protocol and the
Clean Development Mechanism for the Kyoto Protocol (which allows an Annex I country
to mitigate its greenhouse gas emissions by undertaking abatement within a non-Annex I
country) (Barrett 2003, Victor 2001, Victor, Raustiala, and Skolnikoff 1998) and the

16

Credits are denominated in Habitat Units (HUs) and are a measure of habitat value (Fernandez
and Karp 1998). The number of HUs is the product of the number of species or functions per acre
of a wetlands times the number of acres. WMB is intended to create large, high-quality habitats
which incorporate entire ecosystems and bugger areas. Multiple investors in the WMB can pool
their financial resources, planning and scientific expertise. The value of restored wetlands can be
viewed as an option value. If wetlands are restored in the current time period, a developer
preserves the option of cashing in for future development.
17

The heterogeneity of wetlands poses problems is determining mitigation values (Polasky 2002).
Wetlands provide many different ecosystem functions. Polasky (2002, p. 1379) observes,
“Comparing wetlands is difficult because wetlands can differ on a number of different dimensions,
with one wetland providing more of some services and less of others. Because there are typically
no markets for these services, and so no market prices, there is no direct way to aggregate
across services to calculate the value of a wetland or to establish whether different wetlands are
in any real sense equivalent.”
18

One issue with mitigation measures is the “moral hazard” problem that vessels taking sea
turtles as incidental catches will have less reason to avoid interactions.

19

Care must be taken that country investing in mitigation projects in other countries is not
investing in measures that would have been taken anyway. Not only do recipient countries have
incentives to offer projects they would have undertaken anyway, but investing countries have
incentives also to select these projects. (This adverse selection problem is a manifestation of the
free-rider problem in international environmental agreements. Barrett 1998, p. 30) In addition,
some investments in mitigation are lumpy and costs, and when combined with the relatively
delayed age at sexual maturity for sea turtles, mean that mitigation projects require very long
lifetimes.

13

Global Environment Facility, which was established to provide help for developing
countries with climate change, threats to biodiversity and water pollution.20 21
Schemes for mitigation focused on habitat that fill the gap can be supported by
development, fisheries, regulatory, or environment agencies, fisheries associations of
large-scale commercial fleets for swordfish or shrimp, foundation, environmental groups,
international tuna commissions, and/or far-sighted governments (cf. Bishop 2003). Such
programs can aim to improve consistency and transparency in how the impacts of
activities imparting sea turtle mortality are assessed and in the standard of mitigation
expected.
Such schemes can stimulate the emergence of environmental entrepreneurs (“mitigation
bankers”) who coordinate and implement mitigation measures (Bishop 2003). Some are
environmental groups are emerging to fulfill this valuable function. Proponents of such
intermediaries and mitigation bankers assert that these groups can often provide higher
quality mitigation at lower cost, due to economies of scale and specialization. Similarly,
regulatory agencies, fishing fleets, and governments may find it easier to oversee fewer
contracts and interactions in general than numerous, separate mitigation projects in
isolated nesting grounds. Mitigation measures and conservation banking may help
generate significant funds from generators of sea turtle mortality, their governments, or
consumers of biodiversity in general and sea turtles in particular.
As noted elsewhere, international agreements on how to define sea turtle mortality
targets and associated financial mechanisms may take longer to formulate and
implement than collapsed sea turtle populations on the verge of extinction can wait for.
However, voluntary but collective action can quickly mobilize to fill the void, starting in
countries and those environmental or fishing organizations and regulatory, fisheries, or
environment agencies which accept the principle of compensatory mitigation leading not
to simply maintenance of status quo populations, but which recover populations.
Voluntary agreements for mitigation measures, whether national or international in
scope, would need to address a number of key requirements, such as those listed, for
example, by Bishop (2003).22
20

The Kyoto Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism encourages investment in economies
where control of greenhouse gas emissions is least costly and where investments in new
technologies today can “lock in” cleaner development paths that will persist into the future. It
exists because emissions from developing countries are growing rapidly, so that significant effort
to control world emissions should include controls in the developing countries. (Victor 2001, pp.
40-41).
21

The Global Environmental Facility is an example of countries paying other countries to supply
public goods, such as biodiversity preservation. The Global Environmental Facility was
established in 1991 by the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Environment Programme. The Global Environmental Facility was relaunched at
the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio.
22

Bishop (2003, p. 4) suggests the following key requirements any voluntary agreement would
have to address: (1) Establish targets for biodiversity mitigation (e.g. “no net loss” of area or
functionality); (2) Define consistent and transparent indicators for measuring debits and credits
(ideally in terms of Total Economic Value but at a minimum in terms of ecological functionality);
(3) Assign responsibility for assessing development impacts (determining liability) and for
approving mitigation (possible role for existing certification agencies); (4) Ensure sustainability of

14

Polovina and Dutton (2003) have identified several specific mitigation projects for
leatherback and loggerhead turtles in the Pacific that are expected to yield a net
increase in turtles. These mitigation measures for leatherbacks include hiring villagers to
protect nests from predation by feral pigs in West Papua (Irian Jaya) War-non Beach,
working with villagers to reduce and/or eliminate the harpooning of adult females in
coastal foraging grounds in West Papua (Irian Jaya), and to eliminate harvesting of
eggs, dog predation on eggs, and moving eggs laid in areas likely to be lost to beach
erosion in Papua New Guinea nesting beaches. These mitigation measures for
loggerhead turtles include mortality reduction workshops with fishers and placing
observers on local boats to insure that all the live loggerheads caught in halibut gillnets
are returned to the ocean in Baja, Mexico and moving eggs from locations prone to
washing out or that experience extreme temperature at two nesting beaches in Japan
(Polovina and Dutton 2003).
These mitigation measures are in addition to work that is already ongoing, so that
funding them would result in an expansion of conservation that is already underway.
Although beach protection is ongoing, this work is under-funded, and the full potential of
many conservation initiatives remain unrealized. For instance, opportunities exist for
expanding effort for the critically endangered populations in the eastern Pacific. There is
a major initiative underway to purchase critical nesting habitat adjoining the recently
created Baulas national Park in Costa Rica, however, progress has been slowed by lack
of funds. In Mexico, the tremendous progress that has been made over the last few
years (Dutton et al 1999) has at best achieved protection of only 50% of the total nests
laid by leatherbacks. Other species and populations, such as the eastern Pacific green
turtle populations and hawksbills remain critically endangered, and there are many
opportunities to greatly expand beach conservation work so that ideally at-sea mortality
measures will be enhanced and more effective at recovering populations, (and at least,
so that declining populations continue to remain viable).
A mechanism with sea turtles that is analogous to the Montreal and Kyoto Protocol
mitigation measures would be a whereby industry, conservation, or government parties
finance or establish turtle mitigation conservation projects that at a minimum prevent
decline in populations or even lead to a net increase in population, after allowing for
uncertainty in both cases.
7. Conservation Funds
Analogous to the Multilateral Fund, the Global Conservation Fund sponsored by the
Moore Foundation, Clean Development Administration, or the Global Environmental
Facility would be the establishment of an endowed conservation trust fund. Such a fund
could be financed by contributions from large-scale commercial fishing fleets, their
mitigation after credits have been sold (e.g. though endowment funds for on-going management,
mandatory renewal of credits sub ject to inspection, easements and other legal restrictions on
land use); (5) Identify potential buyers of mitigation services (e.g. development assistance
agencies, willing governments, progressive companies); and, once their commitment is secured;
(6) Mobilize suppliers of mitigation services (e.g. conservation NGOs, national environmental
agencies, public and private protected areas). These requirements would necessarily have to be
adapted for sea turtle mitigation requirements.

15

governments, environmental groups, foundations, and other parties interested in
biodiversity in general and sea turtles in particular. Such a fund can finance mitigation
measures or adoption of technology standards in developing countries.
A Pacific fund for sea turtle conservation reflects effective demand for the indirect or
non-consumptive use (ecotourism), non-use (existence), and option (potential future)
values of such biodiversity, together with efficient mechanisms to convey demand from
consumers – mainly in high-income countries, but also from high-income consumers in
developing countries – to “producers” of sea turtle biodiversity – mainly located in
geographically isolated local coastal communities in developing tropical countries.23
8. Taxes or Fees Levied on Producers and Consumers
Taxes, fees, or charges can be levied on swordfish or shrimp landings, on the basis of
sea turtle mortality, or on consumption of swordfish or shrimp. These (Pigouvian) taxes
or fees can be levied either unilaterally on domestic producers or consumers or
multilaterally through the auspices of an international agreement.
Taxes or fees levied on the swordfish or shrimp landings of producers and/or on
consumers of these catches, when these seafood products are caught in conjunction
with interactions with sea turtles, can potentially yield several dividends.24 The first
dividend is reduced sea turtle mortality. The second dividend is to raise revenue to
finance sea turtle conservation and recovery, which potentially provide, which potentially
provide a means for producers, processors, and consumers of swordfish and shrimp.
There is an equity argument in favor of fees in that the users of the globe’s resources –
the producers who initially exploit the resources and environment and the consumers
who consume the final products – should bear the costs and compensate the public for
their use.
8.1. Taxes or Fees, External Costs, and Market Failure
Producers and consumers of seafood do not pay the cost of sea turtle mortality when
there are sea turtle interactions with fishing gear. This creates adverse economic
incentives. Instead, producers and consumers pay only the direct costs associated with
harvests.25 26 These “external costs” of sea turtle mortality are not included in the price of
23

This discussion is drawn from Bishop (2003).

24

This discussion is based, in part, upon Goulder (1998), Kolstad (1999), Cropper and Oates
(1992), Baumol and Oates (1988) and Tietenberg. In addition, shrimp and swordfish markets are
predominately competitive and most producers, processors, and restaurants and fish stores are
limited in size and scale of production. Thus, the (implicit) assumption of price-taking behavior
may be reasonable.
25

These external costs include foregone benefits from the continued existence of sea turtles and
the preservation of sea turtles for future generations, and any foregone benefits (indirect use
values) derived from non-consumptive uses as eco-tourism.

26

The detrimental externality is not fully domestic, but instead is transboundary, requiring a
multilateral and cooperative solution. Thus both consumers and fishers harvesting the population
elsewhere are free riders to unilateral or bilateral conservation measures, and the social benefits

16

swordfish or shrimp; instead, only the direct production costs are incorporated into these
prices. Because the economic value of unpriced swordfish and shrimp resources and
external costs of sea turtle mortality are excluded from seafood prices, the incomplete
market prices for seafood contribute to consumer demand for seafood that exceeds the
socially optimal amount that would occur if all costs were incorporated. A market price
lower than the social optimum in turn contributes to fishing pressures and turtle takes
that exceed the social optimum. Seafood consumers also do not pay their share of the
full social costs of swordfish or shrimp consumption when there is sea turtle mortality.
Other consumer benefits from sea turtles – such as sea turtle existence – are not
captured by markets and there is “market failure” due to incomplete markets.
8.2. Taxes or Fees Levied on Swordfish or Shrimp Landings or Consumption
A tax or fee unilaterally levied on domestic producers and/or consumers of swordfish or
shrimp would help to incorporate the otherwise unaccounted for “external” cost of sea
turtle mortality into the market price of seafood. The proportion of the tax that is borne by
producers and consumers is a priori indeterminate,27 but the higher cost of production
will help lower sea turtle takes28 and the higher seafood price will reduce consumption of
seafood to some degree as seafood markets fully price the entire cost of swordfish or
shrimp production.
A tax or fee unilaterally levied on domestic swordfish or shrimp producers with an aim to
reduce sea turtle mortality does not fully accomplish its ostensible goal, since sea turtles
are migratory and swordfish and shrimp are caught throughout the Pacific Basin. The
domestic tax, to the extent it raises domestic producers’ harvesting costs of swordfish or
shrimp, lowers the scale of domestic catches and hence lowers domestic sources for
consumption which can be replaced by lower-priced imports. As a result of these
production and trade “leakages,” the problem of sea turtle mortality is not fully
addressed.29
provided by this global common property resource exceed the private. This free rider problem
among both individuals and nations leads to substantial under-investment in conservation and
management measures, and an increase in the investment needed to augment the population of
turtles will have to be undertaken under the auspices of cooperative multilateral agreements.
27

They depend on the elasticities of supply and demand.

28

A higher cost of production through the Pigouvian tax which raises the private marginal cost of
harvest to the social cost of harvest (by the amount of the external cost) introduces both a
substitution effect, whereby incidental takes of sea turtles are minimized to the extent practicable
for any level of swordfish catch, and an expansion effect, where the higher cost of production
lowers the amount of fishing effort and thus the quantity of interactions. Over a longer time period,
there is a dynamic effect through induced innovation. When producers and consumers of
swordfish or shrimp must now pay the full cost of production and consumption, the higher
swordfish price and costing of sea turtles could induce technical change that lowers the take rate
of sea turtles. This point has been raised in the context of pollution by Wenders (1975) and Magat
(1978). Completely shutting down a fishery in effect raises the sea turtle cost to infinity and can
lead to technical change that lowers takes of sea turtles.
29

The full economic consequences of taxing consumers or producers is unknown in this instance
of joint production of a desirable output (swordfish or shrimp catch) and an undesirable output
(sea turtle mortality) with and without full cooperation and participation in an international
environmental agreement. In a somewhat analogous situation, Hoel (1994) and Bolombek,

17

A tax or fee levied on production of swordfish or shrimp within a multilateral agreement
can plug production and trade leakages as well as help to incorporate the full external
costs of swordfish and shrimp production from sea turtle mortality into the seafood price.
The multilateral context will only plug the production and trade leakages to the extent
that all producers are part of a collective agreement and are effectively taxed; otherwise,
leakages will persist, albeit dampened, and swordfish or shrimp catches will not be fully
priced – market failure will persist.
A tax or fee can be either lump sum, such as part of an annual license fee, or if on
production, can be levied on swordfish or shrimp landings at either the ex-vessel level or
at some point in the processing chain. The details and ramifications remain to be worked
out. Nonetheless, one advantage of a tax or fee related to production of swordfish and
shrimp is that larger producers pay more tax, reflecting their generally greater probability
of turtle interactions.30 Swordfish or shrimp are jointly harvested with sea turtles. To the
extent that sea turtle mortality is roughly proportional to swordfish or shrimp landings,
there is more direct control over sea turtle than initially appears. An analogous situation
occurred with the transferable permit system that accomplished the U.S. phase-out of
leaded gasoline. Stavins (1998, p. 487) observes, “The currency of that system was not
lead oxide emission from motor vehicles, but the lead content of gasoline.”
The size of the tax or fee that fully costs the otherwise unaccounted for cost of turtle
mortality is difficult to estimate. As a consequence, any tax may over- or under-charge
for the unaccounted for cost of sea turtle mortality. Ideally, taxes or fees that aim to
exactly capture these unpriced costs would also have to be continuously recalculated as
the costs of production and market conditions change, and most importantly, to ensure
that the sea turtle mortality standard is attained.
The problem with a tax on swordfish or shrimp is that the sea turtle mortality standard is
not directly addressed, but only indirectly through a tax or fee on its joint (undesirable)
product, swordfish or shrimp, a common “bad.” Hence, reliance on a tax or fee on
swordfish or shrimp landings or consumption to reduce sea turtle mortality to its “optimal”
level (rather than simply nudging it in the desired direction) could required a large tax
and could substantially increase the cost of seafood production. Moreover, because sea
turtle mortality is only indirectly addressed, swordfish or shrimp producers of this joint
common bad do not directly face the most accurate economic incentives to adjust
operations and absorb a socially sub-optimal cost in terms of swordfish or shrimp
production foregone (weak disposability). In addition, the presence of inflation lowers the
real rate of taxation (adjusted for inflation) over time, unless the process to determine the
fee includes some on-going means of temporal adjustment.
8.3. Tax or Fee Levied on Sea Turtle Interactions or Mortality
Hagen, and Hoel (1995) show that when all countries participate in an agreement to reduce CO2
emissions, taxes on the consumption and production of fossil fuels have identical economic
consequences, provided the tax revenues are identical in the two cases, but that this is no longer
true when there is only limited participation in the international environmental agreement.
30

Much depends not only on time spent fishing, but fishing gear and practices, which can differ
by vessels and between larger and smaller producers.

18

A tax or fee can also be levied on the number of sea turtle interactions or on sea turtle
mortality. Ideally, the tax or fee sums up to the expected mortality from the accumulation
of sea turtle mortality of adults and sub-adults. This approach is very similar to the
approach of transferable sea turtle mortality limits, since this system creates the same
set of incentives. That is, the vessels that can reduce their sea turtle interactions
inexpensively will invest in doing so because each interaction or turtle killed reduced is
that much less paid in taxes or fees. Vessels that find it very expensive to reduce their
sea turtle interactions will continue to interact and pay the taxes. A similar tax was levied
on the production of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) during the time mandatory phase-out
was taking place under the Montreal Protocol, creating a hybrid system under which a
phased decline in CFC production was augmented by a pollution tax (Portney 2003).
A limitation of a tax on sea turtle interactions to directly control sea turtle mortality is the
uncertainty about the effect on sea turtle mortality, although it is certain that the higher
the tax, the lower amount of sea turtle mortality.31 It is also well known that setting the
optimum tax – in order to achieve an exact level of control – is notoriously difficult and
that recomputing the tax as the underlying conditions change is equally difficult. An
advantage with a tax, however, is that sources of sea turtle mortality know that they will
never have to pay more for sea turtle mortality than the tax. In addition, imposition of a
sea turtle interaction or mortality tax requires an observer system to monitor the
interactions and achieve compliance. In contrast, a tax on swordfish or shrimp landings
does not require at-sea observers, but it also has an even more indirect effect on
reducing sea turtle mortality.
Spatial differentiation is an important issue arising with taxes or charges. Sea turtles nest
in different hemispheres and different countries and their migrations also vary spatially.
In addition, sea turtle mortality varies spatially, even within a hemisphere, with some “hot
spots” of high frequency mortality and others with lower frequency of interactions and
mortality. Lump sum fees would have to be explicitly tailored but fees on landings might
roughly correspond to spatial variations in sea turtle mortality. A direct tax on sea turtle
mortality obviates the issue of spatial differences, but requires monitoring through an
international observer program, such as with dolphins through the International Dolphin
Conservation Program.
8.4. Second Dividend of a Tax or Fee: Revenue to Finance Conservation and Recovery

31

Weitzman (1974) is the classic paper in this area. With perfect information, tradable permits
sold at auction have the same effect as a tax. Under uncertainty, the relative efficiency of
transferable permits and fixed tax rates depends on the relative slopes of the relevant marginal
benefits and marginal cost functions. If uncertainty about marginal conservation costs is sizeable,
and if marginal conservation costs are relatively flat and marginal benefits of conservation fall
relatively quickly, then a quantity control, such as a transferable turtle mortality limit, is more
efficient than a price control, such as a tax. When there is also uncertainty about marginal
benefits, and marginal benefits are correlated with marginal costs, then there is an additional
argument in favor of the relative efficiency of quantity controls (Stavins).

19

The second dividend of a tax or fee, particularly on landings of shrimp or swordfish, is to
raise revenue to finance conservation and recovery measures for sea turtles.32 33 34 The
primary benefit of a tax or fee on swordfish or shrimp production or consumption might
be to raise revenue for conservation and only incidentally to directly lower sea turtle
mortality through creation of Pigouvian incentives at the margin. Pacific sea turtles,
because they are a Pacific common resource, are subject to excessive mortality from
takes and insufficient “investment” in conservation and recovery, such as beach
protection or adoption of technology standards that require new investment and which
raise production costs and lower productivity. The revenues raised help to finance this
new investment.
Stavins (1998) observes that while taxes in the U.S. have been imposed on certain
products that are limited to pollution, like gasoline and chemicals, this has typically been
done as a way of raising revenue, such as with gas taxes to fund highway construction
or chemical taxes to fund cleanup of Superfund toxic waste sites, rather than as
incentive devices intended to reduce externalities (such as sea turtle mortality from
fishing).
8.5. In-Kind Taxes and Fees
In-kind taxes or fees occur when producers or consumers directly finance and sponsor
conservation and recovery measures. For example, direct sponsorship of a nesting site
by a fisher or fishing groups or by a restaurant, processor, or retail chain represents an
implicit tax that is paid in kind rather than an explicit tax where funds are collected.
8.6. Fees versus Subsidies35
32

In a revenue-neutral framework, the tax revenues are rebated to the payers. This revenue
recycling is not considered here. Revenues from taxes, fees, or charges are designated for sea
turtle conservation rather than as a source of overall tax revenue.

33

Comparable charges are used in Europe and Japan to address water, and to a lesser extent,
air pollution (Tietenberg, 2000). France and the Netherlands use charges designed to raise
revenues to fund activities that improve water quality. Water discharges in Germany give
incentives to firms to meet minimum standards of waste water treatment for a number of defined
pollutants. Discharges meeting or exceeding standards have to pay only half the normal rate. The
Italian effluent charge system encourages pollutees to achieve provisional effluent standards as
quickly as possible. The charge is nine times higher for non-complying firms and is scheduled to
expire once full compliance is achieved. The French air pollution charge encourages early
adoption of pollution control equipment with revenues returned to those paying the charge as a
subsidy for installing the equipment. Charges in Sweden increase the rate at which consumers
purchase cars equipped with a catalytic converter. Cars without one are taxed and new cars with
one are subsidized.
34

In theory, taxes intended to raise revenue in competitive markets distort resource allocation
and create economic inefficiency through what is called a dead weight loss. However, when there
is a pre-existing market failure and inefficiency due to an external cost (like sea turtle mortality
from fishing), a tax or fee both raises revenue for conservation and recovery and addresses the
market failure, thereby inducing efficiency.
35

This discussion draws from Kolstad 1999, pp. 124-128.

20

A direct subsidy or tax break to swordfish or shrimp producers can also lower interaction
rates with, and mortality of, sea turtles by subsidizing adoption of a technology standard.
Such a subsidy can be effective in adopting new technology or altering fishing practices.
A subsidy can even be paid to producers to produce no swordfish or shrimp, i.e. to shut
down through vessel buybacks or to switch to say longline tuna through deeper sets.
However, a subsidy from the public sector to producers for an external cost of sea turtle
mortality raises the issue of whether the “polluter” or the damaged party pays.36
Another potential problem with subsidies for adoption of a technology standard is that
they can unintentionally counter reductions in sea turtle mortality or perhaps even
increase mortality. A subsidy lowers costs and allows producers which generate higher
rates of sea turtle mortality to continue fishing that otherwise may have gone out of
business.37 A subsidy also promotes or sustains fishing effort, which in turn counters
reductions in sea turtle mortality. A subsidized performance standard does not face this
problem found with a technology standard, but nonetheless represents an expenditure of
real resources by the public and also confounds price signals in the market by masking
the direct costs of fishing and the unpriced external costs of sea turtle mortality.
The research required to develop a new technology standard is sometimes considered
to be a public good (a good or service which can be consumed by all without depleting
or diminishing the good or service). In these circumstances, research to develop a new
technology, such as a technology standard that lowers turtle mortality (TEDs or circle
hooks with mackerel-type bait), can legitimately be financed by the public sector since
the benefits accrue to all. Without subsidies for research or finance by the public sector,
there are often insufficient incentives for individuals to conduct this research, since the
investors do not capture the full benefits of their investment. Public finance or subsidy of
research for a new technology standard that reduces sea turtle mortality is also a way to
funnel the intangible benefits the public enjoys from the existence of sea turtles, which
otherwise do not have a means of expression.
8.7. Tax or Fee Combined with Import Tariff
A tax, fee, or charge on domestic producers and/or consumers can be combined with a
tariff on imports of swordfish or shrimp – an “eco-tariff.”
8.8. General Considerations with Taxes, Fees, and Charges
Taxes or fees have to be determined by an administrative process. When the function of
the charge is to raise revenues for conservation and recovery, charge rates may be
determined by the costs of achieving that process. When the costs of achieving the
purpose rise, the level of the charge must rise to secure the desired outcome.

36

Although the Coase Theorem states that either alternative leads to a social optimum in the
absence of prohibitive transactions costs, in practice whether the creater of the externality or the
party absorbing the externality bears the cost is important for the viability of the activity.
37

Technically, producers with higher costs of sea turtle mortality generate higher opportunity cost
of benefits forgone measured by willingness to pay or willingness to accept.

21

Taxes or fees levied raised to finance conservation and recovery can be levied and
collected by individual governments, international commissions and through international
agreements, or by producers, processors, or final markets. Revenues can also be
voluntarily raised by industry, environmental, or consumer groups.
Taxes or fees work particularly well when transactions costs associated with bargaining
and transfer of transferable turtle mortality limits are high. When transactions costs are
high, due perhaps to widely dispersed vessels or many small vessels or infrequent need
for trades, only large trades can absorb the high transactions costs without jeopardizing
the gains from trade. “For this reason charges seem a more appropriate instrument
when sources are individually small, but numerous (such as residences or automobiles).
Charges also work well as a device for increasing the rate of adoption of new
technologies and for raising revenue to subsidize environmentally benign projects.”
(Tietenberg, 2000, p. 391)
9. Performance Standards
Performance standards directly address the issue of sea turtle mortality through limiting
the incidental take and mortality of sea turtles in pelagic longlining or drift gillnetting and
shrimp trawling or direct takes through small-scale non-commercial and commercial
activities. Performance standards have serious compliance requirements through
monitoring, verification, and enforcement, both to punish identified cases of noncompliance and to deter non-participation. A free rider problem (enjoying the benefits
without bearing the costs through nonparticipation) can arise without effective
compliance.
The Inter-American Convention for the Conservation and Protection of Sea Turtles
prohibits the intentional capture or killing of sea turtles (with exceptions of subsistence
takes under specific conditions), a performance standard (Gibbons-Fly).38 The
Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Marine Turtles
and their Habitats of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia’s Conservation and
Management Plan includes a provision to “Mitigate Threats and Bycatch,” by reducing
“…the incidental capture and mortality of marine turtles in the course of fishing activities
to ensure that any incidental take is sustainable through regulation of fisheries and
through development and implementation of measures such as turtle excluder devices
(TEDs) and seasonal or spatial closure of waters.” The Conservation and Management
Plan of this Memorandum of Understand similarly lists a program to “Reduce to the
greatest extent practicable the incidental capture and mortality of marine turtles in the
course of fishing activities.”39 The ultimate effectiveness of these performance standards
ultimately depends upon the degree of compliance.
38

The Convention provides a general prohibition on the takes of sea turtles and their eggs in the
territories the Parties and in waters under their respective jurisdictions, but allows subsistence
take to satisfy the needs of traditional communities under certain circumstances (Gibbons-Fly).
The Convention requires that the take be reported to the other Parties. The Convention also
provides that countries with subsistence takes agree to take into account the relevant
recommendations of the Consultative Committee and to ensure that such take does not
undermine the overall objectives of the Convention.

39

The elements are: (a) Develop and use gear, devices and techniques to minimize incidental
capture of marine turtles in fisheries, such as devices that effectively allow the escape of marine

22

Performance standards can be strengthened to form use or property rights.
Strengthening the characteristics of property rights, most notably exclusive use, but also
transferability, duration, and divisibility, leads to a stronger property or use right. Dolphin
Mortality Limits are a form of use right, since they allow exclusive use for a single year
and are not transferable. Marketable emission permits, such as those in the Kyoto
Protocol, are a property right since they contain the stronger characteristics of exclusive
use, transferability, divisibility into smaller or larger units, and long duration.
10. Marketable Turtle Mortality Limits As A Transferable Property Right and Wildlife Use
Rights
10.1. Marketable Turtle Mortality Limits
When there are performance standards for takes or mortality of sea turtles, introducing
transferability with a use right for an extended duration creates a market-based
approach to environmental protection. One approach is a “cap-and-trade” system,
whereby each vessel is given an initial turtle mortality limit. It can elect to meet this limit
any way it sees fit, through a technology standard, redirecting its fishing operations to
other times and places, or any other means. Each vessel can elect to reduce its sea
turtle interactions using the least expensive approach available to it. An additional option
is available under the cap-and-trade system: a vessel actually increases its interactions
with sea turtles more than it is required so long as it buys at least equivalent turtle
mortality limits from one or more other vessels or, depending on the conservation and
regulatory system, perhaps through financing mitigation mesaures (discussed below). All
that matters is that the total amount of sea turtle mortality reductions that take place from
all sources are equal to the total turtle mortality limit established at whatever level is
required for recovery of each affected species’ population. Those vessels that will elect
to make significant sea turtle mortality reductions under this cap-and-trade system are
those that can do so easily or inexpensively, while those that elect to buy transferable
sea turtle mortality limits will be those that find it expensive or difficult to reduce. In
addition, all vessels, or sources of sea turtle mortality in general, have a continuing
incentive to reduce their sea turtle mortality, since the more a vessel’s sea turtle
mortality falls short of its limitation, the more sea turtle mortality limits it will have to sell
to other vessels. The overall sea turtle mortality limit and the individual holdings can also
be progressively tightened or loosened over time, depending on the requirements for
population recovery. The transferable sea turtle mortality limit and trading area would
correspond to the nesting sites and migratory routes of each species.
A cap-and-trade approach is used in the United States to control emissions of sulfur
dioxide with the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act.40 More than 100 coal-fired
turtles, and spatial and seasonal closures; (b) Develop procedures and training programmes to
promote implementation of these measures, such as vessel monitoring systems and inspections
at sea, in port and at landing sites, and national on-board observer programmes; (c) Exchange
information and, upon request, provide technical assistance to other signatory States to promote
these activities; (d) Liaise and coordinate with fisheries industries and fisheries management
organizations to develop and implement incidental capture mitigation mechanisms in national
waters and on the high seas.
40

Tradable emission permits are called “allowances.” This program was designed to cut acid rain
by reducing sulfur dioxide (SO2). Allowances can be bought or sold without restriction to cover

23

power plants were given initial emissions reductions, and these plants could meet their
emissions reductions targets themselves, through any means they selected, including
purchase of excess emissions reductions by other plants that found it easy to reduce
their sulfur dioxide. Cap-and-trade approaches have also been proposed to reduce
water and smog pollution. The European Union will use a cap-and-trade system to
control carbon dioxide to comply with the Kyoto Protocol.
Transferable turtle mortality limits could conceivably be used in the year issued or
“banked” or stored for use in any subsequent year. With banking, allowance could be
made for expected growth in sea turtle numbers. In addition, transferable turtle mortality
limits could be allocated gratis or auctioned off (which would give an effect similar to a
tax); the key issue is the distribution of the rents. (Auctions do have the advantage of
facilitating the price discovery process and the development of a market.) Transferable
sea turtle mortality limits may work best when there are wide divergences in producers’
costs and costs of transactions, monitoring, and enforcement are not excessive.
Transferable sea turtle mortality limits might also provide economic incentives for
induced process innovations, such as bundling of limits with swordfish or shrimp
supplies or the invention of new or modified technology standards, such as TEDs or
circle hooks, in exchange for generated limits. The flexibility of a transferable limit also
accommodates dynamic market changes, allowing shifts in industry structure and
production methods while assuring that total mortality does not increase. In short, the
overall turtle mortality limit is set at a level that brings about population recovery and
private firms achieve this goal in the most efficient means of their choosing.
Monitoring and enforcement of an international transferable turtle mortality limit system
could well prove a formidable and costly task; one of the international tuna commissions
would probably serve as the most likely institution for implementation . Regional or
national programs might prove more feasible. Similar issues confront the international
system for transferable emissions of greenhouse gasses, particularly CO2, with the
Kyoto Protocol and for sulfur dioxide (SO2) with the Helsinki Protocol.
10.2. Wildlife Use Rights
International environmental agreements based on an allocation of internationally
transferable rights to wildlife use would be analogous to the Kyoto Protocol. Wealthier
nations, or their citizens and civic groups, could purchase rights to wildlife from poorer
nations for the purpose of conservation or preservation (Giordano 2002). Poorer nations
would then have the option of benefiting from the sale of non-consumptive wildlife use
rights rather than finding themselves limited to a derivation of wildlife value through
extractive means only. Such an approach serves the same goal as side payments in
which developed countries directly or indirectly provide compensation or economic
incentives to developing nations for biodiversity conservation.

emissions anywhere in the continental U.S. (Schmalensee et al. 1998). Emissions everywhere in
the U.S. do not have the same marginal damage, but continent-wide trading helps insure that the
allowance market is not too thin, i.e. that there are sufficient number of trades to insure a wellfunctioning market and price discovery.

24

The notion of benefiting those in developing nations who may bear much of the burden
of conservation from resource use foregone is an important one. Wildlife use values may
be stripped away while the costs of wildlife conservation remain (Giordano 2002).
Economic incentives for conservation and compensation to communities and
subsistence users of sea turtles and their eggs is thus an important element not to be
overlooked.
11. Trade Restrictions
Trade restrictions achieve two things: they can be used to punish countries that do not
cooperate and to correct for a loss in competitiveness of the countries that do cooperate
(Barrett 2003). A trade restriction, to be effective, needs to be sufficiently severe (so that,
when imposed, behavior will be changed) and credible (meaning that, given that a
country chooses not to participate, or not to comply, the cooperating countries are better
off for imposing the restrictions) (Barrett 2003).
Trade restrictions restructure incentives by providing positive economic incentives to
countries that participate in, and comply with, an international environmental agreement
or technology standard, such as with the use of turtle excluder devices or circle hooks
and mackerel-type bait. Trade restrictions also provide negative incentives by punishing
those countries that fail to participate in, and comply with, agreements or standards.
Trade restrictions also plug production and trade leakages. Trade restrictions impose a
cost on member nations of an international sea turtle agreement by foregoing the gains
from trade, which reduces the credibility of trade restrictions.41 Trade restrictions also
face legality issues with the World Trade Organization.
“Eco-tariffs” on imports are a price form of a trade restriction on quantities of imports
allowed into a country. Eco-labeling, in contrast to trade restrictions and “eco-tariffs” can
provide a positive incentive, and when used in conjunction with a trade restriction, import
tariff, or side payments, can provide additional and positive incentives for compliance
and participation.
A licensing system for imports of “turtle safe” shrimp and swordfish provides one means
of implementing a trade restriction. A licensing system and other steps would reduce
black market trade in shrimp and swordfish that is not “turtle safe.”
Production and trade leakages can arise with protection for sea turtles when
participation in an agreement is not full. Sea turtles migrate for long distances, weaving
in and out of Exclusive Economic Zones of coastal countries and the high seas. Efforts
at protection in one or more nations can shift harvests of swordfish or shrimp, and hence
incidental takes of sea turtles, to harvesters of other nationalities, a production leakage.
Attempted protection of turtles and the subsequent production leakage might well not
change sea turtle mortality rates, since swordfish or shrimp harvests from non-protecting
nations can replace the diminished harvests of protecting nations through the active
global import markets, a trade leakage.
41

This is a key reason they are often ineffective. However, if the trade restriction deters relocation
of production or emissions (production leakage), then the countries imposing the sanctions gain
by imposing them. This then reinforces the credibility of sanctions.

25

Trade restrictions are implemented not with direct economic costs and diplomatic costs
(Hogan 2003). Thus, trade restrictions, while they can form an effective and important
policy took, can most prudently be viewed as a policy instrument that is applied only with
the greatest deliberation, if at all.
12. Eco-Labeling and Environmental Product Certification
Eco-labeling or environmental product certification offer a way to provide economic
incentives to adopt technology or even production standards – a “carrot.” At a minimum,
they certify turtle friendly standards defined as adoption of technology standards such as
mortality reduction measures (e.g. line cutters, de-hookers, etc.), or more strongly,
participation in verifiable observer program (100% coverage). Such certification also
guides consumers to make ecologically responsible decisions on seafood and thereby
help convey consumer preferences to markets and from there to the fishing and
processing sector.
13. Direct and Indirect Conservation
Performance and technology standards can be combined with direct conservation
payments or actions, such as payments for wildlife use rights, to communities for nesting
site protection and egg collection and protection, land purchases, leases, and
easements, financial incentives, such as performance payments, and multi-year
conservation agreements in the form of contracts to local communities encompassing
nesting site and critical habitat in general. Performance and technology standards can
also be coupled with indirect conservation payments, such as provisions of alternative
sources of production (e.g. eco-tourism), income, or social benefits (schools, clinics)
(Ferraro and Kiss 2002).
Such direct or indirect conservation payments can occur as side payments from
developed to developing nations in the context of an international environmental
agreement or through voluntary but collective mitigation programs. Direct conservation
payments can be made from producer and consumer groups, regulatory, environment,
fisheries, or development agencies, or environmental groups, in developed nations to
recipients in developing nations.
Direct conservation payments are predicated upon a willing buyer-willing seller model
(Ferraro and Kiss 2002), Heal 2000). Sellers deliver conservation outcomes in exchange
for a negotiated payment in cash or kind. Payments are conditional on conservation
outcomes.
Potential obstacles to implementing a direct payment approach in developing nations
include uncertain or inequitable land tenure, limited experience with and enforcement of
legal contracts, and instability of governments and other relevant institutions (Ferraro
and Kiss, Dalzell 2004, pers. Com.) “Direct payments may also displace biodiversity loss
to other areas, may be misappropriated or misused, and may create social conflict.”
(Ferraro and Kiss, 2002, p. 1718) Ferraro and Kiss discuss four other issues that need to
be examined in relation to direct and indirect conservation approaches: (1) institutional
complexity; (2) costs; (3) development benefits; and (4), sustainability.

26

14. Side Payments
Side payments have both distributive and strategic functions (Barrett in press). Side
payments, such as through technology transfers, payment of incremental costs to adopt
technology standards by developing country fleets, and access to otherwise restricted
markets for shrimp and swordfish, may help increase participation and help make the
agreement fair.42 43 Side payments, by which gainers of a policy can compensate those
who bear the burdens, help insure that nations that would otherwise lose by participating
instead gain.44 Side payments also acknowledge the “common but differentiated”
responsibilities to biodiversity conservation of developing and developed countries, as
explicitly recognized by the London Amendment to the Montreal Protocol in 1994.
This factor of fairness may be especially important if trade restrictions are included in the
agreement by legitimizing these restrictions. The Inter-American Convention for the
Protection and Conservation of Sea Turtles addresses this issue, as for example, Article
XII, “International Cooperation,” where rendering assistance to developing States is
explicitly mentioned.
Several key factors pertaining to sea turtle conservation complicate side payments by
which gainers compensate those who bear the burdens. First, beneficiaries of
conservation, who gain through sea turtle existence, are in both the present and future
42

Costs and benefits of an agreement do not always fall equally on nations and willingness to pay
varies by income levels for many environmental goods and services. By adopting technology
standards or performance standards, gains to cooperation are created and all parties deserve to
receive a share of this gain.
43

Barrett (2003, p. 15) for example, states, “…the Oslo Protocol ignores the need for side
payments. As noted previously, if the winners of acid rain controls do not compensate the losers,
the losers will have little incentive to participate or to reduce their emissions by more than they
would have absent Oslo.”
44

Side payments redistribute the additional gain from cooperation and help guarantee that all
parties are at least as well off as before cooperation. Barrett (2003, p. 351) observes, “…side
payments on their own have little effect on international cooperation. Side payments make the
recipients more inclined to participate, but lower the payoffs of the donor countries, and so make
them less inclined to participate. They do not on their own fundamentally alter the cooperation
problem. In particular, they do not make punishments for free-riding any more credible.” Barrett
(2003, p. 351) later observes about the role of side payments through the Multilateral Fund of the
Montreal Protocol, “On their own, trade restrictions might have deterred non-participation by the
developing countries, but such an outcome would not have been fair. Side payments not only
helped to increase participation. They also legitimized the threat to impose trade restrictions. It is
really the combination of carrots and sticks that succeeded in protecting the earth’s ozone layer.”
In addition, side payments to otherwise non-cooperating countries, while increasing the coalition
of cooperating countries, may create an incentive for them initially to stay out of cooperation (Hoel
and Schneider 1997). In the Kyoto Protocol, the surplus of emission entitlements created by
allowing economies in transition to choose an alternative base year to 1990 (that may not be
exhausted by economic growth in these countries) allows the economies in transition surplus
emissions to trade with Annex I countries and in effect to receive a side payment to foster
participation (Barrett 1998, p. 30).

27

generations (where the latter do not have a voice). Second, benefits are largely nonmarket, that is, they are unpriced and a market for these benefits does not exist, so that
benefits are uncounted. Third, benefits are diffuse throughout the population of present
(and future) generations and are spread across many countries. The voice by which
benefits of preservation are expressed, through willingness to pay or accept, is louder in
richer countries and in the present generation. Fourth, losers tend to be concentrated
among localized and specific groups, such as isolated local communities, who bear the
lion’s share of conservation costs. Fifth, producers and consumers of seafood do not pay
the full cost of production and consumption, which is not captured by any market (an
external cost and market failure). Sixth, the absence of property rights for sea turtles and
over the oceans in general, and especially on the high seas, can complicate the issue of
compensation. Producers have made investments to harvest an unpriced migratory
resource (swordfish). Lastly, ostensible benefits from unilateral or limited multilateral
conservation of sea turtles can be illusory and dissipate because sea turtles and
swordfish are highly migratory, so that conserved turtles in one area are simply taken in
another area. In sum, the heart of the compensation issue is to collect from diffuse
beneficiaries who receive unpriced benefits and transfer some of these gains to localized
and specific losers.
Side payments or compensation to private landowners of nesting site beaches raise
another set of issues. Papers in Shogren and Tschirhart (2001) discuss this issue in
considerable detail.
In sum, side payments can be an important component to any international agreement
for both distributive and strategic purposes. Side payments contribute to the
effectiveness of an international agreement through compensating those who bear the
burden of environmental regulations; ensure that developing countries do not lose by
participating in an agreement; help provide technology transfers; legitimize the threat of
trade restrictions; pay the incremental costs of adopting technology standards; and
foster fairness. Side payments can occur bilaterally from one group or nation to another
or multilaterally through international commissions or conservation trust funds for sea
turtles or biodiversity in general.
15. Concluding Remarks
Reconciling sea turtle recovery in the Pacific with continued fishing remains one of the
critical challenges that needs to be addressed. A comprehensive approach that extends
beyond merely reducing fishery bycatch mortality of sea turtles is required if the
populations are to recover. Recovery strategies need to address all three sources of
anthropogenic mortality (large-scale commercial fisheries, small-scale and artisanal
coastal fisheries, and nesting site sources); benefits that are largely diffuse and nonmarket across high-income countries or high-income groups in developing nations, but
costs which are usually localized and concentrated among some of the most poor and
vulnerable of the developing countries; the trans-boundary nature of the resource and
related issues of incomplete or missing jurisprudence, markets and other institutions,
and conservation measures; and the need for a holistic approach for population recovery
which allows continued fishing.
A broad suite of approaches are needed for recovery. One element includes effective
beach conservation to protect nesting females, their eggs, and critical breeding habitat in
order to maximize hatchling production. A second part enhances at-sea survival of

28

juveniles and adults at critical foraging areas and as they move into different
developmental habitats by dealing with large-scale, commercial fishing fleets or
commercial shrimp trawling. A third component, and perhaps the most intractable,
reduces subsistence and small-scale and artisanal coastal fishers’ takes of turtles. The
current level of conservation effort is inadequate to reverse the decline of several
critically endangered species of sea turtles in the Pacific. If fishing is to continue, these
efforts must be greatly enhanced by integrating fishery management into a holistic sea
turtle recovery strategy.
If fishing is to continue and sea turtle populations are to recover, some important building
blocks of a holistic recovery strategy include mitigation measures, such as nesting site
and other habitat protection, community involvement in conservation, and adoption of
technology standards to reduce bycatch of sea turtles by swordfish and shrimp fishing
fleets. Additional ingredients include side payments to increase participation and
compliance, to equitably distribute the burdens, and to finance mitigation and adoption of
technology standards in developing nations. Additionally, taxes and fees, including inkind, deserve consideration as a way of raising revenues to fund mitigation measures
and side payments, as opposed to the traditional “Pigouvian” role of taxes and fees of
solely trying to correct the unpriced cost of sea turtle mortality. Performance standards,
such as turtle mortality limits, or even some form of use or property right are also
potential components of a broad-based strategy. Direct conservation payments,
especially to local communities for nesting site and habitat preservation and coastal
small-scale and artisanal fishers for adoption of technology standards and perhaps not
fishing during nesting seasons, may well make a surprisingly effective but currently
underappreciated contribution to sea turtle population recovery. Direct conservation
payments of this kind would address two of the three anthropogenic sources of sea turtle
mortality.
There are opportunities to immediately implement these holistic recovery measures
under existing international sea turtle and fisheries treaties and possibly augment them
with additional bilateral or broader multilateral agreements. National action plans can
also play a role.

29

References
Balazs, G.H., Chaloupka, M., 2004. Thirty-year recovery trend in the once depleted
Hawaiian green sea turtle stock. Biological Conservation 117, 491-498.
Barrett, Scott. 1998. “Political Economy of the Kyoto Protocol,” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 20-30.
Barrett, Scott. 1999. “Montreal versus Kyoto: International Cooperation and the Global
Environment.” In Inge Kaul, Isabelle Grunberg, and Marc A. Stern, editors, Global Public
Goods: International Cooperation in the 21st Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barrett, Scott. 2003. Environment and Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental TreatyMaking. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baumol, William and Wallace Oates. 1988. The Theory of Environmental Policy, second
edition. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bean, M. 1993. “Incentive-Based Approaches to Conserving Red-Cockaded
Woodpeckers in the Sandhills of North Carolina.” In W.E. Hudson, ed., Building
Economic Incentives into the Endangered Species Act. Washington, D.C.: Defenders of
Wildlife, pp. 19-26.
Bishop, J. “Voluntary Offsets As A Mechanism for Financing Habitat Conservation,”
IUCN, Gland, Switzerland, 2 December, 2003.
Bovenbag, A. Lans and Lawrence Goulder. 1999. “Environmental Taxation.” In A.
Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, editors, Handbook of Public Economics. New York:
North-Holland.
Brown, Gardner M., Jr. and Jason Shogren. 1998. “Economics of the Endangered
Species Act,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 3-20.
Cervigni, R. 1993. Biodiversity: Incentives to Deforest and Tradable Development
Rights. CSERGE Working Paper GEC 93-07. London: University College London .
Chaloupka, M. 2003. Stochastic simulation modeling of loggerhead population
dynamics given exposure to competing mortality risks in the western South Pacific.
Pages 275-294 in A.B. Bolten and B.E. Witherington (Editors) Loggerhead Sea Turtles,
Smithsonian Institution Press, 319 pp.
Chan, E.H. and H.C. Liew. 1996. Decline of the leatherback population in Terenganu,
Malaysia, 1956-1995. Chelonian Conservation and Biology, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp 196-203.
Chomitz, K., T. Thomas, A. Brandão. 2003. “Creating Markets for Habitat Conservation
When Habitats Are Heterogeneous.” Paper presented to the Fourth BioEcon Workshop
on the Economics of Biodiversity Conservation: Economic Analysis of Policies for
Biodiversty Conservation. Venice International University, Venice, 28-29 August, 2003.

30

Cropper, Maureen and Wallace Oates. 1992. “Environmental Economics: A Survey.”
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 30, pp. 675-750. Reprinted in Robert N. Stavins,
ed., Economics of the Environment: Selected Readings. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.,
2000, pp. 50-130.
Dutton, D.L., Dutton, P.H., Chaloupka, M., Boulon, R.H. In prep. Long term nest

protection initiates recovery of a Caribbean leatherback turtle Dermochelys
coriacea population. Biological Conservation. In review.
Dutton, P.H., L. Sarti, R. Márquez, and D. Squires. 2002. “Sea Turtle Conservation
Across The Shared Marine Border,” in L. Fernandez, editor, Both Sides of the Border:
Transboundary Environmental Management Issues Facing Mexico and the United
States, Kluwer Academic Publishers, sponsored by IGCC, University of California, San
Diego.
FAO. 2004. Expert consultation on interactions between sea turtles and fisheries within
an ecosystem context. FAO Fisheries Report No. 738. FAO, Rome, 37p.
Fernandez, Linda and Larry Karp. 1998. “Restoring Wetlands through Wetlands
Mitigation Banks," Environmental and Resource Economics, Vol. 12,
pp. 323-344.
Ferraro, P. And A. Kiss. 2002. ”Direct Payments to Conserve Biodiversity.” Science, Vol.
298, pp. 1718-1719.
Folmer, Henk, Nick Hanley, and Fanny Mi feldt. 1998. Game-Theoretic Modelling of
Environmental and Resource Problems: An Introduction,” Chapter 1 in Nick Hanley and
Henk Folmer, eds. Game Theory and the Environment. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Giordano, Mark. 2002. “The Internationalization of Wildlife and Efforts Towards Its
Management: A Conceptual Framework and the Historic Record.” Georgetown
International Environmental Law Review, Vol. XIV, Issue 4, pp. 607-628.
Giordano, Mark. 2002. “Wildlife Treaties Series.” Georgetown International
Environmental Law Review, Vol. XIV, Issue 4, pp. 629-692.
Golombek, Rolf, Cathrine Hagem, and Michael Hoel. 1995. “Efficient Incomplete
International Climate Agreements.” Resource and Energy Economics, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp.
25-46. Reprinted in Alstair Ulph, editor, Environmental Policy, International Agreements,
and International Trade. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Goulder, Lawrence. 1998. “Environmental Policy Making in a Second-Best Setting.”
Journal of Applied Economics, Vol. 1, No. 2, reprinted in Robert N. Stavins, editor,
Economics of the Environment: Selected Readings, fourth edition. New York: W.W.
Norton, 2000.
Gra l, H., J. Kokott, M. Kulessa, J. Luther, F. Nurscheler, R. Sauerborn, H.
Schellnhuber, R. Schubert, and E. Schulze. 2002. Changing the Use of Global
Commons. Special Report, German Advisory Council on Global Change, Berlin.

31

Hanley, Nick and Clive Spash. 1993. Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment.
Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Hanley, Nick, Jason Shogren, and Ben White. 1997. Environmental Economics in
Theory and Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hawaii Longline Association. 2003. “Biological Assessment: Proposed Management
Regime for the Hawaii Pelagic Longline Fishery.” Processed, 64
Heal, Geoffrey. 2000. Nature and the Marketplace: Capturing the Value of the
Ecosystem. Island Press.
Hoel, Michael. 1994. “Efficient Climate Policy in the Presence of Free-Riders.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 27, pp. 259-274. Reprinted in Alstair
Ulph, editor, Environmental Policy, International Agreements, and International Trade.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Kolstad, Charles. 1999. Environmental Economics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Magat, Wesley. 1978. “Pollution Control and Technological Advance: A Dynamic Model
of the Firm,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 125.
McCracken ML (2000) Estimation of the sea turtle take and mortality in the Hawaiian
longline fisheries. Administrative Report H-00-06, Honolulu Laboratory, Southwest
Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, Honolulu, Hawaii, p
1-29
Meylan AB, Donnelly M (1999) Status justification for listing the hawksbill turtle (Eretmochelys
imbricata) as critically endangered on the 1996 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals. Chelonian
Conserv Biol 3: 200-224
National Marine Fisheries Service and US Fish and Wildlife Service (1998a) Recovery Plan for
US Pacific Populations of the Loggerhead Turtle (Caretta caretta). National Marine Fisheries
Service, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
National Marine Fisheries Service and US Fish and Wildlife Service (1998b) Recovery Plan for
US Pacific Populations of the Leatherback Turtle (Dermochelys coriacea). National Marine
Fisheries Service, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
National Marine Fisheries Service and US Fish and Wildlife Service (1998c) Recovery Plan for
US Pacific Populations of the Hawksbill Turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata). National Marine
Fisheries Service, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA

National Marine Fisheries Service and US Fish and Wildlife Service (1998d) Recovery
Plan for US Pacific Populations of the Olive Ridley Turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea).
National Marine Fisheries Service, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
Nichols, W.J., A. Resendiz, and C. Mayoral-Russeau. 2000. Biology and conservation of
loggerhead turtles (Caretta caretta) in Baja California, Mexico. Pp. 169-171, in
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Symposium on Sea Turtle Conservation and
Biology, 2-6 March, 1999, South Padre Island, Texas. NOAA-NMFS Tech Memo.

32

Olson, T.G., D.D. Murphy, and R.D. Thornton. 1993. “The Habitat Conservation Method:
A Proposal for Creating Tradeable Credits in Endangered Species Habitat.” In W.E.
Hudson, ed., Building Economic Incentives into the Endangered Species Act.
Washington, D.C.: Defenders of Wildlife, pp. 27-36.
Panayotou, T. 1994. “Conservation of Biodiversity and Economic Development: The
Concept of Transferable Development Rights.” Environmental and Resource Economics,
Vol. 14, pp. 91-110.
Pearson, Charles. 2000. Economics and the Global Environment. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Poiner IR, Harris ANM (1996) The incidental capture, direct mortality and delayed
mortality of turtles in Australia’s northern prawn fishery. Mar Biol 125: 813–825
Polasky, Stephen. 2002. “The Economics of Wetland Ecosystem Restoration and
Mitigation: Discussion.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 84, No. 5, pp.
1379-1380.
Polovina, J. and Peter Dutton. 2003. “Identification of Conservation Activities Which
Would Result in Saving to Leatherback and Loggerhead Populations Impacted by the
Hawaii Longline Fishery.” Memo Submitted by J. Polovina, NOAA Fisheries, to the
Hawaii Longline Associated dated June 24, 2003.
Portney, Paul. 2003. “Market-Based Approaches to Environmental Policy: A ‘Refresher’
Course.” Resources, No. 151, pp. 15-18.
Robert, B. 1999. “Endangered Species Mitigation Banking: Promoting Recovery Through
Habitat Conservation Planning under the Endangered Species Act.” Science of the Total
Environment. 1999 October 18. pp. 24011-2419.
Robins JB (1995) Estimated catch and mortality of sea turtles from the east coast otter
trawl fishery of Queensland, Australia. Biol Conserv 74: 157-167
Schmalansee, Richard, Paul Joskow, A. Denny Ellerman, Juan Pablo Montero, and
Elizabeth Bailey. 1998. “An Interim Evaluation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Trading.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 53-68. Reprinted in Robert
Stavins, editor, Economics of the Environment: Selected Readings, fourth edition. New
York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Shim, Sangmin. 2003. “Koreas’s Leading Role in Joining the Kyoto Protocol with the
Flexibilityh Mechanisms as ‘Side Payments’.” Giordana, Mark. 2002. “The
Internationalization of Wildlife and Efforts Towards Its Management: A Conceptual
Framework and the Historic Record.” Georgetown International Environmental Law
Review, Vol. XV, Issue 2, pp. 203-246.
Shogren and Tschirhart (2001). Protecting Endangered Species in the United States :
Biological Needs, Political Realities, Economic Choices. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press.

33

Stavins, Robert. 1998. “What Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment?
Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 12, No.
3, pp. 69-88. Reprinted in Robert N. Stavins, ed., Economics of the Environment:
Selected Readings. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2000, pp. 50-130.
Sterner, Thomas (2003). Policy Instruments for Environmental and Natural Resource
Management. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future.
Swanson, Timothy and Sam Johnson. 1999. Global Environmental Problems and
International Environmental Agreements: The Economics of International Institution
Building. Edward Elgar.
Tietenberg, Tom. “Economic Instruments for Environmental Regulation.” Oxford Review
of Economic Policy, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 17-33. Reprinted in Robert N. Stavins, ed.,
Economics of the Environment: Selected Readings. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.,
2000, pp. 373-395..
Troëng, S., Rankin, E., 2004. Long-term conservation efforts contribute to positive green
turtle Chelonia mydas nesting trend at Tortuguero, Costa Rica. Biological Conservation.
In press.
Victor, David, Kal Raustiala, and Eugene Skolnikoff. 1998. “Introduction and Overview.”
Chapter 1 in David Victor, Kal Raustiala, and Eugene Skonikoff, eds., The
Implementation and Effectiveness of International Environmental Commitments: Theory
and Practice. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Victor, David. 2001. The Collapse of the Kyoto Protocol and the Struggle to Slow Global
Warming. Princeton University Press.
Wagner, Ulrich J. 2001. “The Design of Stable International Environmental Agreements:
Economy Theory and Political Economy,” Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 15, No. 3,
pp. 377-411.
Watson, J., D. Foster, S. Epperly, and A. Shah. 2003. “Experiments in the Western
Atlantic Northeast Distant Waters to Evaluate Sea Turtle Mitigation Measures in the
Pelagic Longline Fishery.” Report on Experiments in 2002 and 2002. U.S. Department of
Commerce, NOAA Fisheries, 89 pp.
Welch, L. 1995. “Property Rights Conflicts under the Endangered Species Act:
Protection of the Red-Cockaded Woodpecker.” In B. Yandle, The Takings Debate.
Wenders, John. 1975. “Methods for Pollution Control and the Rate of Change in
Pollution Abatement Technology.” Water Resource Research, Vol. 11, No. 3, pp. 393396.
Wetherall JA, Balazs, GH, Tokunaga RA, Yong MM (1993) Bycatch of marine turtles in
North Pacific high-seas driftnet fisheries and impacts on the stocks. North Pacific Fish
Comm Bull 53: 519-538

34

Wold, Chris. 1997. “The Status of Sea Turtles under International Environmental Law
and International Environmental Agreements.” in Sea Turtles: A Shared Resource in
Central America. Processed, Northwestern School of Law, Lewis and Clark College, 38
pp.
Wold, Chris. 2002. The Status of Sea Turtles under International Environmental Law and
International Environmental Agreements, 5 J. Int'
l Wildlife L. & Pol'
y 11.

35

Waif paragraphs……..
These recovery measures include protecting nesting females, protecting against harvest
of eggs and killing of adult females at nesting sites, protecting against beach
degradation, collecting eggs and incubating them, head starting, relocating eggs to
minimize risk, hiring local villagers to protect nesting sites, introducing alternative
sources of income to substitute for subsistence or small-scale commercial harvests, egg
rescue schemes, grassroots environmental education programs, bilateral conservation
programs such as between Mexico and US, improving habitat at all stages of life cycle,
along with technology or even production standards.

36

37
View publication stats

