Article

The future of food from the sea
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2616-y
Received: 19 December 2019
Accepted: 29 June 2020
Published online: 19 August 2020
Check for updates

Christopher Costello1,2,23 ✉, Ling Cao3,23 ✉, Stefan Gelcich4,5,23 ✉, Miguel Á. Cisneros-Mata6,
Christopher M. Free1,2, Halley E. Froehlich7,8, Christopher D. Golden9,10, Gakushi Ishimura11,12,
Jason Maier1, Ilan Macadam-Somer1,2, Tracey Mangin1,2, Michael C. Melnychuk13,
Masanori Miyahara14, Carryn L. de Moor15, Rosamond Naylor16,17, Linda Nøstbakken18,
Elena Ojea19, Erin O’Reilly1,2, Ana M. Parma20, Andrew J. Plantinga1,2, Shakuntala H. Thilsted21 &
Jane Lubchenco22

Global food demand is rising, and serious questions remain about whether supply can
increase sustainably1. Land-based expansion is possible but may exacerbate climate
change and biodiversity loss, and compromise the delivery of other ecosystem
services2–6. As food from the sea represents only 17% of the current production of
edible meat, we ask how much food we can expect the ocean to sustainably produce
by 2050. Here we examine the main food-producing sectors in the ocean—wild
fisheries, finfish mariculture and bivalve mariculture—to estimate ‘sustainable supply
curves’ that account for ecological, economic, regulatory and technological
constraints. We overlay these supply curves with demand scenarios to estimate future
seafood production. We find that under our estimated demand shifts and supply
scenarios (which account for policy reform and technology improvements), edible
food from the sea could increase by 21–44 million tonnes by 2050, a 36–74% increase
compared to current yields. This represents 12–25% of the estimated increase in all
meat needed to feed 9.8 billion people by 2050. Increases in all three sectors are likely,
but are most pronounced for mariculture. Whether these production potentials are
realized sustainably will depend on factors such as policy reforms, technological
innovation and the extent of future shifts in demand.

Human population growth, rising incomes and preference shifts will
considerably increase global demand for nutritious food in the coming
decades. Malnutrition and hunger still plague many countries1,7, and
projections of population and income by 2050 suggest a future need
for more than 500 megatonnes (Mt) of meat per year for human consumption (Supplementary Information section 1.1.6). Scaling up the
production of land-derived food crops is challenging, because of declining yield rates and competition for scarce land and water resources2.
Land-derived seafood (freshwater aquaculture and inland capture
fisheries; we use seafood to denote any aquatic food resource, and food
from the sea for marine resources specifically) has an important role in
food security and global supply, but its expansion is also constrained.
Similar to other land-based production, the expansion of land-based
aquaculture has resulted in substantial environmental externalities
that affect water, soil, biodiversity and climate, and which compromise the ability of the environment to produce food3–6. Despite the
importance of terrestrial aquaculture in seafood production

(Supplementary Fig. 3), many countries—notably China, the largest
inland-aquaculture producer—have restricted the use of land and public waters for this purpose, which constrains expansion8. Although
inland capture fisheries are important for food security, their contribution to total global seafood production is limited (Supplementary
Table 1) and expansion is hampered by ecosystem constraints. Thus, to
meet future needs (and recognizing that land-based sources of fish
and other foods are also part of the solution), we ask whether the
sustainable production of food from the sea has an important role in
future supply.
Food from the sea is produced from wild fisheries and species farmed
in the ocean (mariculture), and currently accounts for 17% of the global
production of edible meat9–12 (Supplementary Information section 1.1,
Supplementary Tables 1–3). In addition to protein, food from the sea
contains bioavailable micronutrients and essential fatty acids that are
not easily found in land-based foods, and is thus uniquely poised to
contribute to global food and nutrition security13–16.

1
Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA. 2Environmental Market Solutions Lab, University of California,
Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA. 3School of Oceanography, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 4Center of Applied Ecology and Sustainability, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. 5Center for the Study of Multiple-Drivers on Marine Socio-Ecological Systems, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. 6Instituto Nacional de
Pesca y Acuacultura, Guaymas, Mexico. 7Ecology, Evolution and Marine Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA. 8Environmental Studies, University of California,
Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA. 9Department of Nutrition, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. 10Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T. H. Chan
School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. 11Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Morioka, Japan. 12National Research Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. 13School of Aquatic
and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 14Fisheries Research and Education Agency of Japan, Yokohama, Japan. 15Marine Resource Assessment and Management
(MARAM) Group, Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, South Africa. 16Department of Earth System Science, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA. 17Center on Food Security and the Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 18Department of Economics, Norwegian School of Economics, Bergen, Norway.
19
Future Oceans Lab, CIM-University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain. 20Center for the Study of Marine Systems, National Scientific and Technical Research Council of Argentina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

WorldFish, Bayan Lepas, Malaysia. 22Department of Integrative Biology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. 23These authors jointly supervised this work: Christopher Costello,
Ling Cao, Stefan Gelcich. ✉e-mail: costello@bren.ucsb.edu; caoling@sjtu.edu.cn; sgelcich@bio.puc.cl

21

Nature | Vol 588 | 3 December 2020 | 95

Article
a

b
Mariculture
Marine capture

90

MSY
OA

60

R

b
M2

M3

M1

M4

Price

Global production (Mt)

a

30

0

1960

1980

2000

2020

1960

1980

Year

2000

2020

Year

Fig. 1 | Marine harvest and food from the sea over time (excluding aquatic
plants). Data are from ref. 9. a, b, Harvests (live-weight production) (a) are
converted to food equivalents (edible production)10 (b). In b, there is also an
assumption that 18% of the annual landings of marine wild fisheries are
directed towards non-food purposes47.

Widely publicized reports about climate change, overfishing, pollution and unsustainable mariculture give the impression that sustainably
increasing the supply of food from the sea is impossible. On the other
hand, unsustainable practices, regulatory barriers, perverse incentives
and other constraints may be limiting seafood production, and shifts
in policies and practices could support both food provisioning and
conservation goals17,18. In this study, we investigate the potential of
expanding the economically and environmentally sustainable production of food from the sea for meeting global food demand in 2050. We
do so by estimating the extent to which food from the sea could plausibly increase under a range of scenarios, including demand scenarios
under which land-based fish act as market substitutes.
The future contribution of food from the sea to global food supply
will depend on a range of ecological, economic, policy and technological factors. Estimates based solely on ecological capacity are useful,
but do not capture the responses of producers to incentives and do
not account for changes in demand, input costs or technology19,20. To
account for these realities, we construct global supply curves of food
from the sea that explicitly account for economic feasibility and feed
constraints. We first derive the conceptual pathways through which
food could be increased in wild fisheries and in mariculture sectors. We
then empirically derive the magnitudes of these pathways to estimate
the sustainable supply of food from each seafood sector at any given
price21. Finally, we match these supply curves with future demand scenarios to estimate the likely future production of sustainable seafood
at the global level.

Sustainably increasing food from the sea
We describe four main pathways by which food supply from the ocean
could increase: (1) improving the management of wild fisheries;
(2) implementing policy reforms of mariculture; (3) advancing feed
technologies for fed mariculture; and (4) shifting demand, which affects
the quantity supplied from all three production sectors.
Although mariculture production has grown steadily over the past
60 years (Fig. 1) and provides an important contribution to food security22, the vast majority (over 80%) of edible meat from the sea comes
from wild fisheries9 (Fig. 1b). Over the past 30 years, supply from this
wild food source has stabilized globally despite growing demand
worldwide, which has raised concerns about our ability to sustainably
increase production. Of nearly 400 fish stocks around the world that
have been monitored since the 1970s by the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), approximately one third are currently not fished
within sustainable limits1. Indeed, overfishing occurs often in poorly
managed (‘open access’) fisheries. This is disproportionately true in
regions with food and nutrition security concerns1. In open-access
96 | Nature | Vol 588 | 3 December 2020

Quantity

Quantity

Fig. 2 | Hypothetical supply curves for wild fisheries and mariculture,
showing the influence of price on production quantity. a, Wild fisheries.
Curves represent poorly managed (open access) fisheries (OA); management
reform for all fisheries (MSY); and economically rational management reform
(R). b, Mariculture. Curves represent weak regulations that allow for
ecologically unsustainable production (M1); overly restrictive policies (M2);
policies that allow for sustainable expansion (M3); and a reduced dependence
on limited feed ingredients for fed-mariculture production (M4).

fisheries, fishing pressure increases as the price rises: this can result
in a ‘backward-bending’ supply curve23,24 (the OA curve in Fig. 2a), in
which higher prices result in the depletion of fish stocks and reduced
productivity—and thus reduced equilibrium food provision.
Fishery management allows overexploited stocks to rebuild, which
can increase long-term food production from wild fisheries25,26. We
present two hypothetical pathways by which wild fisheries could adopt
improved management (Fig. 2a). First, independent of economic conditions, governments can impose reforms in fishery management. The
resulting production in 2050 from this pathway—assuming that fisheries are managed for maximum sustainable yield (MSY)—is represented
by the MSY curve in Fig. 2a, and is independent of price. The second
pathway explicitly recognizes that wild fisheries are expensive to monitor (for example, via stock assessments) and manage (for example, via
quotas)—management reforms are adopted only by fisheries for which
future profits outweigh the associated costs of improved management. When management entities respond to economic incentives, the
number of fisheries for which the benefits of improved management
outweigh the costs increases as demand (and thus price) increases. This
economically rational management endogenously determines which
fisheries are well-managed, and thus how much food production they
deliver, resulting in supply curve designated R in Fig. 2a.
Although the production of wild fisheries is approaching its ecological limits, current mariculture production is far below its ecological
limits and could be increased through policy reforms, technological
advancements and increased demand19,27. We present explanations
for why food production from mariculture is currently limited, and
describe how the relaxation of these constraints gives rise to distinct
pathways for expansion (Fig. 2b). The first pathway recognizes that
ineffective policies have limited the supply28,29. Lax regulations in some
regions have resulted in poor environmental stewardship, disease and
even collapse, which have compromised the viability of food production in the long run (curve M1 in Fig. 2b). In other regions, regulations
are overly restrictive, convoluted and poorly defined30,31, and thus
limit production (curve M2 in Fig. 2b). In both cases, improved policies
and implementation can increase food production by preventing and
ending environmentally damaging mariculture practices (the shift
from M1 to M3 in Fig. 2b) and allowing for environmentally sustainable
expansion (the shift from M2 to M3 in Fig. 2b).
The second pathway to sustainably increase mariculture production
is through further technological advances in finfish feeds. Currently,
most mariculture production (75%) requires some feed input (such as
fishmeal and fish oil) that is largely derived from wild forage fisheries1.

F current

Policy reforms

Rational reform

Technological innovation

MSY

Technological innovation (ambitious)

a
2,500

b

c

6,000

2,500

Price (US$ per t)

2,000

2,000
4,000

1,500

1,500

1,000

1,000
2,000

500

0

500

0

20
40
Edible production (Mt)

60

0

0

50
100
150
Edible production (Mt)

0

0

25
50
75
100
Edible production (Mt)

Fig. 3 | Estimated sustainable supply curves for wild fisheries, finfish
mariculture and bivalve mariculture. a–c, Points represent current production
and average price in each sector: marine wild fisheries (a), finfish mariculture (b)
and bivalve mariculture (c). In a, supply curves for annual steady-state edible
production from wild fisheries are shown under three different management
scenarios: production in 2050 under current fishing effort assuming that fishing
only occurs in fisheries that are profitable (F current); the economically rational
supply curve aimed at maximizing profitability (rational reform); and a reform
policy aimed at maximizing food production, regardless of the economic

considerations (MSY). In b, supply curves for finfish (fed) mariculture show:
future steady-state production under current feed assumptions and policy
reform (policy reform); sustainable production assuming policy reform and a
50% reduction in fishmeal and fish oil feed requirements (technological
innovation); and sustainable production assuming policy reform and a 95%
reduction in fishmeal and fish oil feed requirements (technological innovation
(ambitious)). In all cases, feed ingredients are from the economically rational
reform of wild fisheries.

If fed mariculture continues using fishmeal and fish oil at the current
rate, its growth will be constrained by the ecological limits of these wild
fisheries32. Alternative feed ingredients—including terrestrial plant- or
animal-based proteins, seafood processing waste, microbial ingredients, insects, algae and genetically modified plants—are rapidly being
developed and are increasingly used in mariculture feeds33–36. These
innovations could decouple fed mariculture from wild fisheries (but
may refocus pressure on terrestrial ecosystems) and could catalyse
considerable expansion in some regions37,38. This has already begun
for many fed species, such as Atlantic salmon—for which fish-based
ingredient use has been reduced from 90% in the 1990s to just 25% at
present39. A reduced reliance on fishmeal and fish oil is expected to shift
the supply curve of fed mariculture to the right (curve M4 in Fig. 2b).
The final pathway is a shift in demand (aggregated across all global
fish consumers), which affects all three production sectors. When the
sustainable supply curve is upward-sloping, an increase in demand
(rightward shift; for example, from rising population, income or preferences) increases food production.

the management approach and exploitation rate of fisheries depend
on profitability), the price influences production (Fig. 3a). At current
mean global prices, this scenario would result in 51.3 Mt of food (77.4 Mt
live-weight equivalent)—a 4% increase compared to current food production. These management-induced shifts in supply are ultimately
limited by the carrying capacity of the ecosystem. If current fishing
pressure is maintained for each fish stock when profitable (F current,
referring to the current fishing mortality rate), food production from
wild fisheries is lower for most prices than under the two reform scenarios (owing to fishing too intensively on some stocks, and too conservatively on others)25: this supply curve is not backward-bending, as
it reflects constant fishing pressures.
We estimate the production potential of mariculture at a resolution of 0.217° around the world for finfish and bivalves. Ecological
conditions—sea surface temperature, dissolved oxygen and primary
productivity—determine the suitability of each pixel for mariculture
production. We build on previous models19 by including economic
considerations (including the capital costs of vessels and equipment,
and the operating costs of wages, fuel, feed, insurance and maintenance; Supplementary Tables 5–7) to determine whether farming an
ecologically suitable area is economically profitable at any given price.
Summing economically viable production for each sector at the global
level for different prices produces two mariculture supply curves. This
approach assumes that the most profitable sites will be developed first,
but does not explicitly include challenges such as the cost of public
regulation and the delineation of property rights. Farm design is based
on best practice for sustainable production, and we therefore interpret
the results as an environmentally sustainable supply. We examine a
range of assumptions regarding production costs, and explore different
technological assumptions with respect to the species type farmed for
finfish mariculture (Methods, Supplementary Information section 1.3,
Supplementary Table 9). The supply curve for finfish mariculture differs
substantially among future feed-technology scenarios, although all of
these scenarios foretell a substantial increase in annual food supply in

Estimated sustainable supply curves
We estimate supply curves of food from the sea in 2050 for the three
largest food sectors in the ocean: wild fisheries, finfish mariculture
and bivalve mariculture. We construct global supply curves for marine
wild fisheries using projected future production for 4,702 fisheries
under alternative management scenarios (Fig. 3a). We model future
production with a bioeconomic model based on ref. 17, which tracks
annual biomass, harvest and profit, and accounts for costs associated
with extraction and management (see Methods and Supplementary
Information for details). Managing all fisheries to maximize food production (MSY) would result in 57.4 Mt of food in 2050 (derived from
89.3 Mt of total harvest, hereafter noted as live-weight equivalent),
representing a 16% increase compared to the current food production
(Fig. 3a). Under a scenario of economically rational reform (in which

Nature | Vol 588 | 3 December 2020 | 97

Article
a

Price (US$ per t)

20,000
15,000

b

c

6,000

2,000
1,500

4,000

1,000

10,000
2,000

5,000
0

500

0
0

50 100 150 200
Edible production (Mt)
Supply

0

50 100 150 200
Edible production (Mt)

Current demand

Future demand

0

0

25
50
75 100
Edible production (Mt)
Extreme demand

Fig. 4 | Supply and demand curves of food from the sea for the three sectors.
a–c, Supply and demand curves for marine wild fisheries (a), finfish
mariculture (b) and bivalve mariculture (c) . In each panel, the solid black line is
the supply curve from Fig. 3: for wild fisheries, the rational reform scenario is
shown, and for finfish mariculture the technological innovation (ambitious)

scenario is shown. Future demand refers to estimated demand in 2050;
extreme demand represents a doubling of the estimated demand in 2050. The
intersections of demand and sustainable supply curve (indicated with crosses)
provide an estimate of the future food from the sea. Points represent current
production and average price in each sector.

the future compared to the current production of the sector (6.8 Mt of
food) (Fig. 3b). However, the policy reform scenario—which assumes
mariculture policies are neither too restrictive nor lax (curve M3 in
Fig. 2b), but that fishmeal and fish oil requirements match present-day
conditions—produces a modest additional 1.4 Mt of food at current
prices. In this scenario, marine-based feed inputs limit mariculture
expansion even as the price increases considerably.
Two feed-innovation scenarios—representing policy reform plus a
50% or 95% reduction in fishmeal and fish oil requirements, which we
refer to as ‘technological innovation’ and ‘technological innovation
(ambitious)’, respectively—can substantially shift the supply curve.
At current prices, future supply under these scenarios is predicted
to increase substantially to 17.2 Mt and 174.5 Mt of food for technological innovation and technological innovation (ambitious) scenarios,
respectively (Fig. 3b). Bivalve mariculture is constrained by current
policy but not by feed limitations, and is poised to expand substantially under policy reform scenarios. At current prices, economically
rational production could lead to an increase from 2.9 Mt to 80.5 Mt of
food (Fig. 3c). Even if our model underestimates costs by 50%, policy
reforms would increase the production potential of both fed and unfed
mariculture at current prices. For fed mariculture, this remains true
even when evaluating mariculture species with different feed demands
(Atlantic salmon, milkfish and barramundi).

sea per year, 5% more than the current levels (59 Mt). But we know
that demand will increase as incomes rise and populations expand.
Under the ‘future demand’ scenario (purple curves in Fig. 4), total food
from the sea is projected to increase to 80 Mt. If demand shifts even
more (as represented by our ‘extreme demand’ scenario; red curves in
Fig. 4), the intersection of supply and demand is expected to increase
to 103 Mt of food. Using the approach used by the FAO to estimate
future needs, the world will require an additional 177 Mt of meat by 2050
(Supplementary Information section 1.1.6)—our results suggest that
additional food from the sea alone could plausibly contribute 12–25% of
this need. Another possibility we consider is that future consumers will
not distinguish between fish-producing sectors, such that all sources
of fish (including land-based) would be substitutes for each other.
Adopting that assumption alters the supply-and-demand equilibrium,
and implies that the increase among all sources of fish (sea and land)
relative to the present could be between 90–212 Mt of food; under this
scenario, expansion of aquatic foods alone could possibly exceed the
177-Mt benchmark.
Our results also suggest that the future composition of food from
the sea will differ substantially from the present (Fig. 5). Although wild
fisheries dominate edible marine production at present, we project
that by 2050 up to 44% of edible marine production could come from
mariculture (rising to 76% when all fish are substitutes and land-based
fish are included under extreme demand scenarios (Supplementary
Fig. 3, Supplementary Table 14)), although all sectors could increase
production. Although even more substantial increases are technically
possible (for example, fed mariculture alone is capable of generating
at least the benchmark 177 Mt of additional meat), actually realizing
these gains would require enormous shifts in demand.
Our models rely on a number of assumptions and parameters that
are uncertain, and which may interact in nonlinear ways. To test the
robustness of our main conclusions, we examine a range of scenarios
and run an extensive sensitivity analysis (Supplementary Information).
Across a wide range of cost, technology and demand scenarios, we find
that sustainably harvested food from the sea: (1) has the potential to
increase considerably in the coming decades; (2) will change in composition, with a greater future share coming from mariculture; and
(3), in aggregate, could have an outsized role in meeting future meat
demands around the world (Supplementary Figs. 1–4, Supplementary
Tables 13–17).

Estimates of future food from the sea
Our supply curves suggest that all three sectors of ocean food production are capable of sustainably producing much more food than they do
at present. The quantity of seafood demanded will also respond to price.
We present three demand-curve estimates, shown in Fig. 4 (Methods,
Supplementary Information). The intersections of future demand and
sustainable supply curves provide an estimate of future food production from the sea. Because it is a substantial contributor to fish supply
and—in some instances—acts as a market substitute for seafood, we
also account for land-based aquatic food production (from freshwater
aquaculture and inland capture fisheries; Supplementary Information
section 1.4, Supplementary Tables 10–12). Estimates of future production from this fourth sector (‘inland fisheries’) are shown side-by-side in
Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Tables 13, 14 (for quantities of
food) and in Supplementary Tables 15, 16 (for live-weight equivalents),
and are discussed with the results on food from the sea.
Even under current demand curves (green curves in Fig. 4), the economically rational reform of marine wild fisheries and sustainable
mariculture policies (stocking densities consistent with European
organic standards40) under the technological innovation (ambitious)
scenario could result in a combined total of 62 Mt of food from the
98 | Nature | Vol 588 | 3 December 2020

Conclusions
Global food demand is rising, and expanding land-based production is
fraught with environmental and health concerns. Because seafood is
nutritionally diverse and avoids or lessens many of the environmental

a

5%

b

6%

11%

12%

59 Mt

62 Mt
81%

84%

c

d

11%

17%

17%

80 Mt

103 Mt
56%

27%

71%

Marine wild fisheries

Finfish mariculture

Bivalve mariculture

Fig. 5 | Composition of current and future food from the sea under three
alternative demand scenarios. a, Composition of current (initial production)
food from the sea. b–d, Composition of future (2050) food from the sea under
scenarios of current (b), future (c) and extreme (d) demand. The sustainable
supply curves assumed for these predictions are: rational reform for wild
fisheries; technological innovation (ambitious) for finfish mariculture; and
policy reform for bivalve mariculture, as shown in Fig. 3. The total production
of food from the sea per year is shown in the centre in each panel.

burdens of terrestrial food production, it is uniquely positioned to
contribute to both food provision and future global food and nutrition
security. Our estimated sustainable supply curves of food from the
sea suggest substantial possibilities for future expansion in both wild
fisheries and mariculture. The potential for increased global production from wild fisheries hinges on maintaining fish populations near
their most-productive levels. For underutilized stocks, this will require
expanding existing markets. For overfished stocks, this will require
adopting or improving management practices that prevent overfishing
and allow depleted stocks to rebuild. Effective management practices
commonly involve setting and enforcing science-based limits on catch
or fishing effort, but appropriate interventions will depend on the biological, socioeconomic, cultural and governance contexts of individual
fisheries. Effective management will be further challenged by climate
change, species composition changes in marine ecosystems and illegal
fishing. Directing resources away from subsidies that enhance fishing
capacity towards building institutional and technical capacity for fisheries research, management and enforcement will help to meet these
challenges. Increased mariculture production will require management practices and policies that allow for environmentally sustainable
expansion, while balancing the associated trade-offs to the greatest
extent possible; this principle underpins the entire analysis. We find
that substantial expansion is realistic, given the costs of production
and the likely future increase in demand.
We have identified a variety of ways that sustainable supply
curves can shift outward. These shifts interact with future demand to
determine the plausible future equilibrium quantity of food produced
from the sea. We find that although supply could increase to more
than six times the current level (primarily via expanded mariculture),
the demand shift required to engage this level of supply is unlikely.
Under more realistic demand scenarios and appropriate reforms of
the supply, we find that food from the sea could increase in all three
sectors (wild fisheries, finfish mariculture and bivalve mariculture)
to a total of 80–103 Mt of food in 2050 versus 59 Mt at present (in
live-weight equivalents, 159–227 Mt compared to 102 Mt at present).
When combined with projected inland production, this represents
an 18–44% per decade increase in live-weight production, which is

somewhat higher than the 14% increase that the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the FAO project for total fish production during the next decade41. Under some
scenarios, future production could represent a disproportionate
fraction of the estimated total increase in global food production that
will be required to feed 9.8 billion people by 2050. Substantial growth
in mariculture will rely partly on public perceptions. Although there
is some evidence of a negative public perception of aquaculture, it is
highly variable by region and by context42,43, and certifications and
the provision of other information can help to alleviate concerns and
expand demand44.
These global projections will not have uniform implications around
the world. For example, improved policies that shift the supply curve
outward will decrease prices, but income-induced demand shifts will
increase prices. Both effects increase production, but have vastly different consequences for low-income consumers. Bivalves may contribute
substantially to food security by providing relatively low-cost and thus
accessible food, because they have a high production potential at low
costs compared to finfish production (Fig. 3). If all seafood is perfectly
substitutable, bivalves could contribute 43% and 34% of future aquatic
food under future and extreme demand scenarios, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 3)—which suggests potential large increases in production, provided demand is high enough. Trade also has an important
role in distributing seafood from high-production to low-production
regions, and in overcoming regional mismatches in price. The rate
of international trade of seafood products has increased over past
decades, and 27% of seafood products were traded in 20161, although
major economic disruptions—such as the COVID-19 pandemic—can
jointly reduce both supply and demand of traded seafood. On the other
hand, trade may become increasingly relied upon as climate change
alters regional productivity.
Substantially expanding the production of food from the sea will
bring co-benefits and trade-offs, and will require national and interregional governance, as well as local capacity to ensure equity and
sustainability. The improved management of wild fisheries can not
only increase fish biomass, but also brings the co-benefit of improved
livelihoods of fishers. However, there will be some short-term costs
as overfished stocks rebuild to levels that support greater food provision. As mariculture expands, interactions with wild fisheries and
other ecosystem services (via spatial overlaps, pollution and so on)
must be constantly addressed. Ambitious technical innovation (that
is, the substitution of marine ingredients with terrestrial-sourced
proteins) can help to decouple fed mariculture from wild fisheries,
but will probably refocus some pressure on terrestrial ecosystems.
Climate change will further challenge food security. Estimates suggest
that active adaptation to climate-induced changes will be crucial in
both wild fisheries45 and mariculture46. Climate-adaptive management of wild fisheries and decisions regarding mariculture production (for example, the type of feed used, species produced and farm
siting) could improve food provision from the sea under conditions
of climate change.
We have shown that the sea can be a much larger contributor to sustainable food production than is currently the case, and that this comes
about by implementing a range of plausible and actionable mechanisms. The price mechanism—when it motivates improved fishery
management and the sustainable expansion of mariculture into new
areas—arises from change in demand, and acts on its own without any
explicit intervention. The feed technology mechanism is driven by
incentives to innovate, and thus acquire intellectual property rights
to new technologies. When intellectual property is not ensured, or
to achieve other social goals, there may be a role for public subsidies
or other investments in these technologies. The policy mechanism
pervades all three production sectors, and could make—or break—the
ability of food from the sea to sustainably, equitably and efficiently
expand in the future.
Nature | Vol 588 | 3 December 2020 | 99

Article
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information,
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code
availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2616-y.
1.
2.

FAO. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture (FAO, 2018).
Olsen, Y. Resources for fish feed in future mariculture. Aquacult. Environ. Interact. 1,
187–200 (2011).
3.
Foley, J. A. et al. Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature 478, 337–342 (2011).
4. Foley, J. A. et al. Global consequences of land use. Science 309, 570–574 (2005).
5.
Mbow, C. et al. in Climate Change and Land (IPCC Special Report) (eds Shukla, P. R. et al.)
Ch. 5 (IPCC, 2019).
6.
Amundson, R. et al. Soil and human security in the 21st century. Science 348, 1261071
(2015).
7.
UNDP. Sustainable Development Goal 2, Sustainable Development Goals. https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg2 (accessed 27 July 2020).
8.
De Silva, S. & Davy, F. Success Stories in Asian Aquaculture (Springer 2010).
9.
FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. FishStatJ – Software for Fishery and
Aquaculture Statistical Time Series. http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/software/
fishstatj/en (2019).
10. Edwards, P., Zhang, W., Belton, B. & Little, D. C. Misunderstandings, myths and mantras in
aquaculture: its contribution to world food supplies has been systematically over
reported. Mar. Policy 106, 103547 (2019).
11. FAO. FAOSTAT. http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#home (2020).
12. Nijdam, D., Rood, T. & Westhoek, H. The price of protein: review of land use and carbon
footprints from life cycle assessments of animal food products and their substitutes.
Food Policy 37, 760–770 (2012).
13. Kawarazuka, N. & Béné, C. Linking small-scale fisheries and aquaculture to household
nutritional security: an overview. Food Secur. 2, 343–357 (2010).
14. Allison, E. H. Aquaculture, Fisheries, Poverty and Food Security (Working Paper 2011–65)
(WorldFish Center, 2011).
15. Golden, C. D. et al. Fall in fish catch threatens human health. Nature 534, 317–320 (2016).
16. Hicks, C. C. et al. Harnessing global fisheries to tackle micronutrient deficiencies. Nature
574, 95–98 (2019).
17. Costello, C. et al. Global fishery prospects under contrasting management regimes. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 5125–5129 (2016).
18. Ye, Y. & Gutierrez, N. L. Ending fishery overexploitation by expanding from local
successes to globalized solutions. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 1, 0179 (2017).
19. Gentry, R. R. et al. Mapping the global potential for marine aquaculture. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 1,
1317–1324 (2017).
20. Troell, M., Jonell, M. & Henriksson, P. J. G. Ocean space for seafood. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 1,
1224–1225 (2017).
21. Costello, C. et al. The Future of Food from the Sea http://oceanpanel.org/
future-food-sea (World Resources Institute, 2019).
22. Belton, B., Bush, S. R. & Little, D. C. Not just for the wealthy: rethinking farmed fish
consumption in the Global South. Glob. Food Secur. 16, 85–92 (2018).
23. Copes, P. The backward-bending supply curve of the fishing industry. Scott. J. Polit. Econ.
17, 69–77 (1970).
24. Nielsen, M. Trade liberalisation, resource sustainability and welfare: the case of East Baltic
cod. Ecol. Econ. 58, 650–664 (2006).
25. Hilborn, R. & Costello, C. The potential for blue growth in marine fish yield, profit and
abundance of fish in the ocean. Mar. Policy 87, 350–355 (2018).

100 | Nature | Vol 588 | 3 December 2020

26. Hilborn, R. et al. Effective fisheries management instrumental in improving fish stock
status. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 2218–2224 (2020).
27. Joffre, O. M., Klerkx, L., Dickson, M. & Verdegem, M. How is innovation in aquaculture
conceptualized and managed? A systematic literature review and reflection framework to
inform analysis and action. Aquaculture 470, 129–148 (2017).
28. Abate, T. G., Nielsen, R. & Tveterås, R. Stringency of environmental regulation and
aquaculture growth: a cross-country analysis. Aquac. Econ. Manag. 20, 201–221
(2016).
29. Gentry, R. R., Ruff, E. O. & Lester, S. E. Temporal patterns of adoption of mariculture
innovation globally. Nat. Sustain. 2, 949–956 (2019).
30. The Sea Grant Law Center. Overcoming Impediments to Shellfish Aquaculture Through
Legal Research and Outreach: Case Studies (NOAA, 2019).
31. Davies, I. P. et al. Governance of marine aquaculture: pitfalls, potential, and pathways
forward. Mar. Policy 104, 29–36 (2019).
32. Froehlich, H. E., Jacobsen, N. S., Essington, T. E., Clavelle, T. & Halpern, B. S. Avoiding the
ecological limits of forage fish for fed aquaculture. Nat. Sustain. 1, 298–303 (2018).
33. Klinger, D. & Naylor, R. Searching for solutions in aquaculture: charting a sustainable
course. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 37, 247–276 (2012).
34. Cao, L. et al. China’s aquaculture and the world’s wild fisheries. Science 347, 133–135
(2015).
35. Little, D. C., Newton, R. W. & Beveridge, M. C. M. Aquaculture: a rapidly growing and
significant source of sustainable food? Status, transitions and potential. Proc. Nutr. Soc.
75, 274–286 (2016).
36. Shah, M. R. et al. Microalgae in aquafeeds for a sustainable aquaculture industry. J. Appl.
Phycol. 30, 197–213 (2018).
37. Troell, M. et al. Does aquaculture add resilience to the global food system? Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 111, 13257–13263 (2014).
38. Froehlich, H. E., Runge, C. A., Gentry, R. R., Gaines, S. D. & Halpern, B. S. Comparative
terrestrial feed and land use of an aquaculture-dominant world. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
115, 5295–5300 (2018).
39. Aas, T. S., Ytrestøyl, T. & Åsgård, T. Utilization of feed resources in the production of
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) in Norway: An update for 2016. Aquacult. Rep. 15, 100216
(2019).
40. European Union. Commission Regulation (EC) No 889/2008 of 5 September 2008 laying
down detailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 on
organic production and labelling of organic products with regard to organic production,
labelling and control. Offic. J. EU L 250, 1–84 (2008).
41. OECD & Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. OECD-FAO Agricultural
Outlook 2019–2028 (OECD, 2019).
42. Froehlich, H. E., Gentry, R. R., Rust, M. B., Grimm, D. & Halpern, B. S. Public perceptions of
aquaculture: evaluating spatiotemporal patterns of sentiment around the world. PLoS
ONE 12, e0169281 (2017).
43. Bacher, K. Perceptions and Misconceptions of Aquaculture: A Global Overview
(GLOBEFISH, 2015).
44. Bronnmann, J. & Asche, F. Sustainable seafood from aquaculture and wild fisheries:
insights from a discrete choice experiment in Germany. Ecol. Econ. 142, 113–119
(2017).
45. Gaines, S. D. et al. Improved fisheries management could offset many negative effects of
climate change. Sci. Adv. 4, eaao1378 (2018).
46. Froehlich, H. E., Gentry, R. R. & Halpern, B. S. Global change in marine aquaculture
production potential under climate change. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 2, 1745–1750 (2018).
47. Cashion, T., Tyedmers, P. & Parker, R. W. R. Global reduction fisheries and their products in
the context of sustainable limits. Fish Fish. 18, 1026–1037 (2017).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2020

Methods
Sample size was a census of all available fisheries data. No experiments
were conducted.
Here we describe our methods in brief: detailed methods, sensitivity
analyses and robustness checks are provided in the Supplementary
Information.

Sustainable supply curves
The supply of food from marine wild fisheries is jointly determined by
ecosystem constraints, fishery policy and prevailing economic conditions. Estimated supply curves show the projected 2050 production
quantity at a given price, incorporating harvesting costs, management
costs and fishery-specific engagement decisions for individual fisheries. Current management of the 4,702 marine fisheries included in our
study range from open access to strong target-based management17.
Using data from the RAM Legacy Stock Assessment Database48, the
FAO9 and refs. 17,49,50, we calculate three supply curves that represent
summed global production from established wild fisheries for a range
of prices (Fig. 3). The first (F current) assumes that all fisheries in the
world maintain their current fishing mortality rate if profitable (that is,
fisheries for which current fishing pressure would result in steady-state
profit < 0 are not fished). The second (rational reform) assumes that
fisheries are reformed to maximize long-term food production (that is,
adopt FMSY, the fishing mortality rate that results in maximum sustainable yield (MSY)), but only at prices for which reform results in greater
future profit than that of current management. Importantly, adopting
reform is associated with greater management costs for fisheries that
are currently weakly managed. If a fishery is managed, its production
changes, which alters the supply curve. Production occurs in a given
fishery only if future profit > 0. The third supply curve (MSY) assumes
that all fisheries are managed to maximize sustainable yield, regardless
of the cost or benefit of doing so (Fig. 3). Supply curves under alternative cost assumptions yield results similar to those presented in Fig. 3
(Supplementary Fig. 1).
To construct supply curves for finfish and bivalve mariculture (which
account for 83% of current production of edible animal products from
mariculture11), we use a previously published19 global suitability dataset
at a resolution of 0.217°. Ecological conditions (that is, surface temperature, dissolved oxygen and primary productivity (bivalves only))
determine the suitability of different areas for production. We build on
ref. 19 by including economic considerations (for example, the capital
costs of vessels and equipment and operating costs of wages, fuel,
feed, insurance and maintenance; see Supplementary Information
section 1.3, Supplementary Tables 5–7 for more details) to determine
whether an ecologically suitable area is also economically profitable
to farm at a given price. For any given price, we estimate the potential
production and profitability of each pixel, and determine the global
set of economically viable pixels for mariculture production of finfish
and bivalves; we allow for production of both kinds of mariculture in
the same pixel, provided the pixel is economically suitable for both.
Summing production in this manner at the global level provides a point
on the supply curve, at which farm design (Supplementary Table 4) is
based on best practices for sustainable production (that is, stocking
densities consistent with European organic standards40). We then derive
supply curves under different assumptions regarding mariculture
policy and technological innovation, which affect the parameters of
the supply model.
We estimate supply curves for finfish mariculture under three scenarios, all of which assume that wild fisheries are rationally managed;
this pins down the potential supply of wild fish that can be used as feed
in mariculture (Supplementary Table 8). We display three supply curves
for fed mariculture (Fig. 3). The policy reforms scenario represents a
future in which regulatory barriers are removed, unsustainable production is prevented and mariculture continues to use feed ingredients

from wild fisheries at the current rate (that is, feed conversion ratios
remain static, fishmeal and fish oil inclusion rates in feed remain the
same, and feed availability depends on production from wild fisheries).
This scenario represents the economically rational sustainable production given the current feed context. Two technological innovation
scenarios represent policy reform plus a 50% and (a more ambitious)
95% reduction in fishmeal and fish oil requirements for fed mariculture
production. The supply curve for bivalve (unfed) mariculture (Fig. 3)
reflects production in the set of pixels for which unfed mariculture can
be profitably produced at any given price.

Supply meets demand
To estimate how food from the sea might help to meet future increases
in demand at the global level, we require estimates of the current and
future demand curves of food from the sea. The intersection of future
demand curves and our estimated sustainable supply curves provides
an estimate of food from the sea in 2050. As a benchmark, we assume
that the three sectors are independent, but that increases in demand
are parametric, so each of the three sectors experiences a proportional
increase in future demand—for example, as global population and
per capita incomes rise (see Supplementary Information for detailed
results, assuming all aquatic foods are perfect substitutes). We assume
a straightforward structure in which each sector faces an isoelastic
demand (for example, see ref. 51, with own price elasticity = −0.382;
ref. 52; and sector-specific income elasticities estimated from ref. 51). Using
these elasticities, the coefficient on current-demand curve in each sector (current, in Fig. 4) is tuned so the demand curve passes through the
current price of seafood in that sector (averaged across fish from that
sector) given the current global gross domestic product and population.
Effectively, this approach assumes that all fish within a sector are substitutes. We do not explicitly estimate a current supply curve because it is
not required to perform our calculations and—for reasons stated in the
Article—we do not necessarily regard the current supply as sustainable.
To project future demand at the global level, we develop two scenarios that we term future and extreme (Fig. 4). The future demand
represents the demand curve for food from the sea in each sector given
exogenous estimates of future population size and global income in
205053,54, which are entered as parameters in the demand curve (Supplementary Information). The extreme scenario doubles the quantity
demanded at any given price in 2050, relative to the future scenario;
we regard demand shifts larger than this amount as unlikely.
The Supplementary Information contains an extensive set of robustness checks and sensitivity analyses. One important alternative to the
model in the Article is to allow all fish to be perfect substitutes in the
future. Under that model, land-based fish production (aquaculture and
capture) must be accounted for because those fish act as substitutes for
food from the sea. Although this tends to increase the final estimates
of food production from the sea, our qualitative findings are robust to
this assumption and the Supplementary Information reports how this
changes the model results described in the Article.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

Data availability
All datasets analysed during the current study are available in a Dryad
repository at https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.25349/
D96G6H.

Code availability
All code used to conduct the study are available in a GitHub repository:
https://github.com/emlab-ucsb/future_food_from_sea.

Article
48. Ricard, D., Minto, C., Jensen, O. P. & Baum, J. K. Examining the knowledge base and status
of commercially exploited marine species with the RAM Legacy Stock Assessment
Database. Fish Fish. 13, 380–398 (2012).
49. Melnychuk, M. C., Clavelle, T., Owashi, B. & Strauss, K. Reconstruction of global ex-vessel
prices of fished species. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 74, 121–133 (2017).
50. Mangin, T. et al. Are fishery management upgrades worth the cost? PLoS ONE 13,
e0204258 (2018).
51. Cai, J. & Leung, P. Short-term Projection of Global Fish Demand and Supply Gaps (FAO, 2017).
52. Muhammad, A., Seale, J. L. Jr, Meade, B. & Regmi, A. International Evidence on Food
Consumption Patterns: An Update Using 2005 International Comparison Program
Data. Technical Bulletin No. TB-1929 (United States Department of Agriculture, 2011).
53. PwC. The Long View: How will the global economic order change by 2050? https://www.
pwc.com/gx/en/world-2050/assets/pwc-the-world-in-2050-full-report-feb-2017.pdf
(2017).
54. United Nations. World population projected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050, and 11.2 billion in
2100. World population projected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050, and 11.2 billion in 2100
https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/
world-population-prospects-2017.html (2017).
Acknowledgements This research is adapted from a Blue Paper commissioned by the High
Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy entitled ‘The Future of Food from the Sea’. We
thank the high-level panel for a sustainable ocean economy, N. Frost, K. Teleki, T. Clavelle and
A. Merkl for inspiration and comments. We thank SYSTEMIQ (C.C., C.M.F., T.M., E.O’R.

and A.J.P.), World Resources Institute (C.C., C.M.F., T.M., E.O’R. and A.J.P.), the David and Lucile
Packard Foundation (L.C. and S.G.), the European Research Council (679812) (E.O.), ANID PIA/
BASAL 0002 (S.G.) and GAIN-Xunta de Galicia (E.O.) for financial support.
Author contributions C.C., L.C., S.G. and A.J.P. conceived the study. C.C., L.C., C.M.F., H.E.F.,
S.G., T.M. and A.J.P. contributed to the study design. C.C., L.C., C.M.F., J.M., T.M., R.N. and A.J.P.
contributed to the acquisition and analysis of data. C.C., L.C., M.Á.C.-M., C.M.F., H.E.F., S.G.,
T.M., R.N., A.J.P. and S.H.T. contributed to the interpretation of results. C.C., L.C., M.A.C., H.E.F.,
S.G., C.D.G., G.I., I.M.-S., J.M., T.M., M.C.M., M.M., C.L.d.M., R.N., L.N., E.O., E.O’R., A.M.P, A.J.P.,
J.L. and S.H.T. wrote and edited the manuscript.
Competing interests C.C. serves as trustee for Environmental Defense Fund and Global
Fishing Watch. H.E.F. serves as a scientific advisor on the Technical Advisory Group for the
Aquaculture Stewardship Council. R.N. serves on the scientific advisory board for Oceana and
Nature Food. C.L.d.M. has undertaken work funded by government agencies, fishery industry
organizations and regional fisheries management organizations. C.D.G. serves on the scientific
advisory board for Oceana.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-0202616-y.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.C., L.C. or S.G.
Peer review information Nature thanks Dale Squires and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

Last updated by author(s): 05/29/2020

Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.

nature research | reporting summary

Corresponding author(s): Christopher Costello

Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.

A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient)
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.

For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.

Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection

All data are from publicly available sources identified in the manuscript.

Data analysis

All data analysis was performed by the authors using our own code.

For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.

Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:

All datasets analyzed during the current study are available in a Dryad repository: https://datadryad.org/stash/share/1hAjSQ3nwsUAgrShYfVm6yNZSTF9oJpGWrT1_J0NyU [Note: this is currently a private repo but we will provide a public link prior to publication]. All code used to conduct
the study are available in a GitHub repository: https://github.com/emlab-ucsb/future_food_from_sea.

April 2020

- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets
- A list of figures that have associated raw data
- A description of any restrictions on data availability

1

Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences

Behavioural & social sciences

Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences

For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf

Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description

Analysis of existing data to derive supply of seafood.

Research sample

Publicly available data sources used: FAO Fishery and Aquaculture Statistics (FishstatJ); FAOSTAT; Costello, C., Ovando, D., Clavelle, T.,
Strauss, C.K., Hilborn, R., Melnychuk, M.C., Branch, T.A., Gaines, S.D., Szuwalski, C.S., Cabral, R.B. and Rader, D.N., 2016. Global
fishery prospects under contrasting management regimes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(18), pp.5125-5129;
Mangin, T., Costello, C., Anderson, J., Arnason, R., Elliott, M., Gaines, S.D., Hilborn, R., Peterson, E. and Sumaila, R., 2018. Are fishery
management upgrades worth the cost?. PLOS One, 13(9).; Cai, J. & Leung, P. Short-term projection of global fish demand and supply
gaps. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017; Gentry, R.R., Froehlich, H.E., Grimm, D., Kareiva, P., Parke, M.,
Rust, M., Gaines, S.D., Halpern, B.S. (2017) Mapping the global potential for marine aquaculture. Nature Ecology & Evolution 1(9)
1317-1324.

Sampling strategy

Sample is a census of all available fisheries data.

Data collection

Only pre-existing data was used in the analysis.

nature research | reporting summary

Field-specific reporting

Timing and spatial scale FAO Fishstat-J: 1950-2017; global scale
Costello et al. 2016: historical 1950-2012; projections 2013-2050; global scale
Mangin et al. 2018: 2012; global scale
Cai et al. 2017: mean values based on mid-2010s to early 2020s; global scale
Gentry et al. 2017: no temporal aspect; global scale

Data exclusions

No data were excluded from the analysis.

Reproducibility

Experimental replication was not attempted, as no experiment was performed.

Randomization

The study did not involve group allocation.

Blinding

Experiment was not performed, so blinding is not relevant to the study.

Did the study involve field work?

Yes

No

Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material,
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response.

Materials & experimental systems

Methods

n/a Involved in the study

n/a Involved in the study

Antibodies

ChIP-seq

Eukaryotic cell lines

Flow cytometry

Palaeontology and archaeology

MRI-based neuroimaging

Animals and other organisms
Human research participants

Dual use research of concern

April 2020

Clinical data

2

