Copyright © 2009 by the author(s). Published here under license by the Resilience Alliance.
Finley, C. 2009. The social construction of fishing, 1949. Ecology and Society 14(1): 6. [online] URL: http:
//www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

Insight, part of a Special Feature on Pathways to Resilient Salmon Ecosystems

The Social Construction of Fishing, 1949
Carmel Finley 1

ABSTRACT. The theoretical construction known as maximum sustained yield (MSY) exists in three
realms: as science, as policy, and as a legal concept. Despite substantial criticism by scientists and
economists, MSY remains at the heart of fisheries science and fisheries management. This paper suggests
that its institutional resilience springs more from its policy and legal roles than from its scientific strength.
Maximum sustained yield was adopted as the goal of American fisheries policy in 1949. Between 1949
and 1955, the State Department pushed for its adoption internationally. In this paper, I first look briefly at
the relationship between fishing and foreign policy goals during this period. Second, I look at how fishing
was understood during 1949, when the American High Seas Fishing Policy was adopted. Third, I look at
the actions of the 1955 International Technical Conference on the Conservation of the Living Resources
of the Sea and how American actions shaped the development of fisheries science and the modern fishery
management process.
Key Words: fisheries history; fisheries management; Milner B. Schaefer; salmon; surplus production
theory; Wilbert M. Chapman; William C. Herrington

INTRODUCTION
There is a large body of scientific and economic
thought that is critical of maximum sustained yield
(MSY) as the objective of fisheries management
(Larkin 1977, McGoodwin 1990, Bottom 1997,
Pauly and Maclean 2003, Roberts 2007). Yet MSY
remains at the heart of fisheries science and fisheries
management and is firmly entrenched in legal and
policy documents, treaties, and commissions.
Although it has been modified (altered from
maximum harvest to optimum harvest), such
constrictions are recent and do not substantially alter
the thrust of the policy, which has been to justify
relatively high harvests. This entrenchment of MSY
in policy, scientific, and legal mandates has made
it more difficult for scientists and policy makers to
implement policies that will enhance resilience in
ocean ecosystems (Pauly 1994, Healey 2009).
The analysis of the failures of MSY has tended to
come from scientists and economists, who have
looked at the problems in relative isolation, trying
to “fix” the science and ignoring the political context
in which the science was developed (Finlayson
1

Department of History, Oregon State University

1994). My analysis looks at the post-World War II
context in which MSY was shaped and the political
forces that resulted in its adoption as the goal of
international fisheries management in 1955.
Between 1945 and 1958, fisheries concerns were
tightly coupled with foreign policy for many
countries, as fishing boats were a source of territorial
claims in a world that officially upheld the freedom
of the seas and limited coastal waters to 3 miles (4.8
km).
It took fisheries scientists until the 1930s to prove
scientifically that the Victorian scientist T. S.
Huxley had been incorrect when he said that the
great sea fishes were inexhaustible and that it was
futile to try to regulate the great fisheries. During
this period, scientists worked to formulate strategy
of what would constitute “rational fishing,” where
both fish stocks and fishermen would be managed
together (Kyle 1905, Thompson 1936, Russell
1942, Graham 1943, Sharp 1995). The adoption of
MSY diverted scientists from this conversation,
focusing the science on estimating critical harvest
points, where the catch would be maximized yet
sustained (Smith 1994).

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

Maximum sustained yield essentially reflects the
idea that the fish and the ocean system are infinitely
resilient, an assumption that facilitated the
enormous expansion of global fishing after World
War II. It further postulates that scientists will be
able to correctly estimate the critical points, where
the greatest number of fish are at their maximum
growth, a harvest level that can be sustained.
Maximum sustained yield also embedded a number
of anthropogenic ideas (Lichatowich 1999) about
fish abundance (Huxley 1883, Stone 1884). The
ocean was essentially unchanging, implying steady
states or equilibrium in fish populations (Francis
1980). Fishing, which was seen as part of the total
mortality that fish faced, played a role in
maintaining the equilibrium by removing older fish,
freeing up resources for young fish that grow faster.
If a stock was overharvested, fishing pressure could
be relaxed and the stock would recover to previously
high levels.
It also reflects an agricultural model of
conservation, and a belief that fish populations are
malleable and can be controlled for human benefit
(McEvoy 1988) and that the oceans can be reordered
to produce high-value species. Fish were widely
transplanted and hatcheries offered the promise of
restoring depleted stocks, especially for salmon
(Oncorhynchus spp., Salmo spp.), but also for such
ocean species as plaice (Pleuronectes platessa)
(Shelbourne 1971). With the discovery of the
Oregon Moist Pellet and improved hatchery
survival during the 1950s, scientists assumed that
the limiting factor in unlimited salmon production
—juvenile survival—had been surmounted (Hublou
et al. 1959). The ocean “pasture” was unlimited in
its ability to rear salmon in such numbers that most
of the fish were “surplus” to what was needed to
provide eggs for propagation.
Hatchery expansion in the Pacific Northwest
occurred during a period of favorable survival
conditions for West Coast salmonids, but also a
period of intense pressure to produce more fish for
social reasons. Under such conditions, hatcheries
became politically acceptable symbols of more fish
(Scarnecchia 1988). They ensured that whereas the
stocks were conserved under MSY, there would still
be plenty of fish for growing numbers of fishers and
anglers. Thus, MSY offered a scientific basis for
management that met multiple political and
economic objectives.

American Hegemony in Science
There is a growing body of literature about
American hegemony in science after World War II,
but most of it deals with interactions among
Americans and European physicists (Doel 1997,
Krige 2006). Other works concentrate on the
development of American science during the Cold
War (Leslie 1993) and the field of oceanography
(Oreskes and Rainger 2000, Rainger 2001, Hamblin
2005).
In contrast, little scholarly attention has been given
to the development of fisheries science in the postwar period, with the exception of a large number of
studies on the collapse of Atlantic cod (Gadus
morhua), (Finlayson 1994, Parsons and Beckett
1994, Hutchings and Myers 1995, Hannesson 1996,
Wright 2001, Pope 2004, Hubbard 2006). Legal
scholars have not seen the U.S. as being successful
in transferring its post-war power into dominance
in fishing (Hollick 1981, Scheiber 1989). But this
legal analysis does not take into account the
American role in the adoption of post-war fisheries
science, or its influence in the development of the
modern fisheries management process.
When examined within a larger context of American
scientific influence after World War II, the U.S. was
extremely successful in shaping both fisheries
science and the fisheries management process. This
is because fisheries issues were tightly tied to
foreign policy concerns within the State Department
between 1945 and 1958. Three American fisheries
scientists, Wilbert McLeod Chapman (1910–1970),
William C. Herrington (1903–1991), and Milner B.
Schaefer (1913–1970), played significant roles in
bringing fisheries science into the State Department.
In the process, they decisively shaped the
development of American fisheries science.
FISHERIES AND AMERICAN FOREIGN
POLICY
The cornerstone of foreign policy during this period
was open seas and open skies: for American planes,
submarines, naval vessels, and fishing boats
(Paterson 1992). The U.S. wanted a string of
military bases throughout the Pacific and a fleet of
American boats catching tuna (Thunnus spp.) in the
Mandated Islands, where the Japanese had
developed a fishery during the 1920s (Kishinouye

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

1923, U.S. Navy 1944, Supreme Commander Allied
Powers (SCAP) 1949, Schaller 1985).
These objectives were threatened by the territorial
claims filed by Mexico and Latin American
countries between 1945 and 1955. Peru, Chile, and
Ecuador were moving aggressively to expand their
territorial limits, threatening to impose restrictions
on illegal whaling (Fraser et al. 1977, Tonnessen
and Johnson 1982) and on American fishing for bait
stocks (Wolff 1980). The Latin Americans claimed
bait fish were overfished, but the U.S. responded
there was no scientific evidence of overharvest
(Wilbert M. Chapman to the American Tuna
Association (ATA), 9 August 1950, ATA files, Box
27, Folder, “Fisheries Industries Advisors,” Scripps
Institution of Oceanography).
A State Department reorganization in 1944 resulted
in responsibility for fisheries being placed in the
commodity division of the economic branch. In a
storm of protest, the industry argued that fisheries
involved vital national interests, diplomacy, and
international law. Industry representatives met in
January 1944 in Los Angeles and created the Pacific
Fisheries Congress to push for a greater voice within
the State Department. Pacific Fisherman publisher
Miller Freeman was chairman (Miller Freeman
Papers, Box 5, Folder 36, University of Washington
Special Collections).
The American fishing industry was under severe
pressure. New England fishermen sought a tariff
against fillets from Canada, Norway, and Iceland
(Dewar 1983). In southern California, the tuna
industry was concerned that tuna exports from Japan
would destroy their markets, as Japanese tuna had
during the 1930s. The West Coast salmon industry
was worried about the return of the Japanese to the
international waters of Bristol Bay, where they had
fished for king crab (Paralithodes camtschaticus)
and bottomfish during the 1930s. In early 1947,
Secretary of State George Marshall approved the
creation of an under-secretary advisor for the
industry.
Wilbert McLeod Chapman was appointed in April
1948. Born in Kalama, Washington, Chapman
graduated from the University of Washington in
1937 with a doctoral degree in ichthyology. He
worked for various state and federal fisheries
agencies before the war, when he was sent to the
equatorial Pacific to help create a small fishery

designed to provide fresh fish to military troops. He
returned to his job as the Curator of Fishes at the
California Academy of the Sciences in San
Francisco, with a goal of expanding American
fisheries into the Mandated Islands, the Marshall,
Caroline, and Marianas. In 1948, he was named
director of the School of Fisheries at the University
of Washington. His State Department appointment
was announced in the spring.
The most immediate crisis facing Chapman in
Washington was the negotiation of a treaty with 11
European countries and Canada to regulate the
depleted North Atlantic fisheries. With the collapse
of the California sardines (Sardinops caerulea),
American purse seine boats were pouring into the
tuna fishery off Mexico, which wanted a fisheries
agreement that would include license fees on the
purse seine boats. A peace treaty was also being
negotiated with Japan, but the question of where the
Japanese would be allowed to fish was a significant
sticking point (Scheiber 2001).
FISHERIES SCIENCE AND DIPLOMACY
Under Chapman, fisheries science became a tool of
diplomacy within the U.S. State Department.
Within months of arriving in Washington, Chapman
crafted the U.S. High Seas Fisheries Policy. The
policy goals were to reinforce the Truman
Proclamation of 1945, to uphold the principle of the
freedom of the seas, and to establish that fish stocks
could be conserved without claiming expanded
territorial limits (Watt 1979). The scientific
foundation of the policy was MSY, which Chapman
defined as making “possible the maximum
production of food from the sea on a sustained basis
year after year” (Chapman 1949).
The High Seas Policy was published in the Secretary
of State Bulletin on 16 January 1949. A fisheries
treaty with Mexico was signed on 25 January 1949.
Three days later, on 28 January 1949, an agreement
was signed to regulate the North Atlantic,
establishing the International North Atlantic
Fisheries Commission (INCAP). On 31 May 1949,
a convention was signed with Costa Rica to create
the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
(IATTC). The U.S. actions imposed a fisheries goal
before discussions among scientists began. One of
Chapman’s goals was to avoid any international
control over American fishing (Chapman 1949).

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

All three treaties, and the two commissions they
established, were to be managed to produce MSY.
The High Seas Policy formalized what had been
unofficial American fisheries policy since the days
of Spencer Fullerton Baird and the creation of the
U.S. Fish Commission (Allard 1978). The idea of
harvesting the maximum was reinforced during
World War II, when Secretary of the Interior Harold
Ickes assumed control of fishing policy with the goal
of maximum production for the war effort, a policy
that accelerated the catch of both California sardines
and Alaskan salmon (Cooley 1963, McEvoy 1986).
Chapman’s High Seas Policy rested on an implied
scientific formulation, yet the critical document was
not published in a refereed scientific journal, but in
the Bulletin of the Secretary of State. There are no
formal references. The graph that supports the
theory (Fig. 1) has no numerical scale on the axes.
It is a theoretical construction with no quantitative
dimension. There was no quantitative evidence
given to demonstrate or otherwise justify its actual
relation to nature.
However, the High Seas Policy offered the solution
to several political problems. The Canadians were
urging action to control the growing number of
foreign boats fishing in the western Atlantic. They
sought a treaty with the European nations, but the
United States did not want to subject itself to a
European convention (Rozwadowski 2002). The
convention with Costa Rica allowed the
establishment of a scientific investigation into the
rapidly expanding American tuna fishery,
addressing Latin American concerns about the
overfishing of baitfish stocks (Wolff 1980).
The High Seas Policy also outlined the American
preferred option for regulating fisheries through the
creation of bilateral or multilateral commissions
with limited authority. Chapman’s model of
management was the International Pacific Halibut
Commission, established by Canada and the U.S. in
1923 to reverse the declines in the halibut
(Hippoglossus stenolepis) stocks (Dunn 2002).
CHAPMAN CONCEPT OF THE ROLE OF
FISHING
The idea of maximum harvest as a goal of fishing
is based in a utilitarian philosophy that resources
are to be used and that not to harvest is wasteful. It
reflects progressive ideals of efficiency and

expertise, where trained experts would be able to
estimate when the maximum harvest had been
attained (Hays 1959). It also reflects a growing
industrialization of nature after 1920 as scientific
concepts of industrial management were increasingly
applied to natural resource systems in an effort to
standardize and increase production (Josephson
2002). These concepts are also reflected in the
statutory mandates of the U.S. Forest Service and
the Bureau of Land Management (Cortner and
Moote 1999). Holling and Meffe call pesticides,
monoculture, fire suppression, and clearcutting
“pathologies,” used by managers to try to control
the natural world (Holling and Meffe 1996).
The adoption of MSY was grounded in Cold War
politics, but also in an anthropogenic approach to
explaining the oceans (Holm et al. 2001) that saw
the ocean in terms of essentially benign agricultural
metaphors: it could be farmed, and we could raise
as many fish as we needed in hatcheries. Wild fish
were crops to be harvested (Bottom 1997, Bottom
et al. 2009). Sending large nets across the bottom
of the oceans was akin to plowing (Pauly et al. 2002).
Managers believed regulation should be light and
that technology brought progress by making the
natural world more efficient. If resources were
overharvested, they could recover (Smith 1990).
The goal of post-war science was not to establish
how much of a resource could be harvested but to
determine how to exceed natural limits (Hirt 1994,
Robbins 1997).
Chapman believed that as the intensity of fishing on
a stock increased, the reproductive capacity of the
fish population also increased for reasons that
scientists did not understand, perhaps because there
was more food for the fish that were left or because
there was less predation. He expressed the
relationship in a dome-shaped curve:
The meaning of this curve is that for any
particular population of fish there is an
optimum point of fishing intensity which, if
sustained, will yield the maximum crop of
fish year after year. Less fishing is wasteful,
for the surplus of fish dies from natural
causes without benefit to mankind; more
fishing is wasteful because it depletes the
population and so results actually in a
smaller crop (Chapman 1949).
The implication here seems to be an
acknowledgement that fish populations fluctuate,

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

Fig. 1. Chapman’s graph, published in the U.S. High Seas Fisheries Policy, U.S. Department of State
Bulletin XX: 69.

sometimes widely, but fishing produced the
conditions that allowed the population to respond
and produce the maximum amount of fish on a
sustained basis, year after year.
In other words, fishing played an integral role in
stabilizing fish populations. Just as American
settlers in the 19th century believed that the rain
followed the plow, so Chapman seems to be saying
that fishing created the conditions to produce more
fish.
For Chapman, a key concept was that management
was only necessary when fishing intensity passed
the point of maximum return, a point that could only
be determined by scientists (Pauly and Maclean
2003).
Chapman left the State Department in 1951,
replaced by William C. Herrington, who had

extensive experience with the New England
fisheries during his years with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service before being sent to Japan to head
the fisheries section of the Natural Resources
Division of the SCAP. The SCAP was pushing for
the resumption of Japanese whaling in Antarctica
and the return of tuna boats to the Mandated Islands.
The international situation continued to cause
problems for domestic fishermen. Mexican and
South American countries seized American fishing
boats in both the Atlantic and the Pacific. As tuna
exports from Japan increased greatly during the
early 1950s, they pushed American tuna off the
grocery store shelves. The southern California boats
joined with New England fishermen in seeking tariff
protection from imports. The State Department
opposed all tariffs, based on foreign policy
consideration of expanding trade with strategically
important Japan and Iceland, where the U.S. wanted

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

to maintain an air base. The American fishing
industry was one of the nation’s first sectors to have
domestic jobs sacrificed for foreign policy
considerations (Eckes 1992).

international organization to give binding
recommendations in settling fishing disputes
(NARA, RG 59 Box 1538, 398.245, memorandum
of conversation at Mexican Ministry for Foreign
Relations, 31 March 1955).

SURPLUS PRODUCTION THEORY

The actions by the Latin Americans in seeking to
create a regional 200-mile (322-km) limit alarmed
not only the U.S., but Britain as well, which was
seeking to maintain its access to cod stocks off
Norway, Iceland, and Newfoundland. Herrington
began negotiations with the British during the
summer of 1954 (record of Anglo-American
Discussions on the Continental Shelf and Fishery
Problems, Foreign Office, 22 July 1954, British
Archives, FO 371/115380.)

In 1953, the International Law Commission
recommended that new ocean law was needed to
deal with the escalating fisheries conflicts. It
recommended that a new international body be
created, under the auspices of the Food and
Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the United
Nations, with binding authority, and that territorial
waters be expanded from 3 miles to 6 miles (4.8–
9.7 km). The U.S. opposed the recommendations,
and in December of 1954, Herrington went to the
United Nations and suggested that a technical
conference be held in April to give guidance to the
law commission, scheduled to meet in June in
Geneva (speech by William C. Herrington,
University of Rhode Island, 27 June 1966,
American Tuna Association files, Box 29, unlabeled
folder, Scripps Institution of Oceanography).
Three weeks before the conference started, on 27
March 1955, Ecuador seized two American flag
fishing vessels, the Arctic Maid and the Santa Ana,
off the Ecuadorian coast. An American seaman was
seriously wounded by gunfire from the Ecuadorian
patrol vessel. Fines of more than $49 000 were
imposed on the vessel, despite strong American
protests. Ecuador’s ambassador to the U.S., Jose
Chiriboga, apologized for the shooting, but said
Ecuador was bound by the international agreement
it had signed with Peru and Chile to take action to
protect its maritime waters (State Department
Memorandum of Conservation, 31 March 1955,
Box 4142, 811.245, NARA RG 59). Tensions were
high as the delegates headed to Rome.
The International Technical Conference on the
Conservation of the Living Resources of the Sea
was held between 18 April and 10 May 1955, at
FAO headquarters in Rome. It was billed as a
scientific meeting, but it was in fact a political one,
focused on halting the escalating number of
territorial claims being made against the industrial
fishing nations (Hollick 1978, Beverton 1994). The
American objective was to formulate a new set of
recommendations for the law commission,
scotching the ideas of expanding state territorial
waters to 6 miles (9.7 km) and creating an

As far as the U.S. was concerned, the technical
conference was about much more than fish (draft
instructions to the U.S. Delegation, William C.
Herrington, 30 March 1955, papers of Edward
Allen, Box 23, Folder “UN International
Conference,” University of Washington Special
Collections). The U.S. did not want the conference
to deal with territorial issues (Floyd McDougall to
P.V. Cardon, 4 October 1954, unlabeled folder,
FAO Files 14 FI 159 RG 14). Herrington traveled
to Ottawa, Gothenburg, Oslo, Stockholm, and
London during February 1955 for consultations
(summary record of an informal meeting held in
London on 9–10 February 1955, British Archives,
FO 371/115380). He also traveled to Havana and
Mexico City, and arrived in Rome a week before
the meeting to consult with delegates from France,
Greece, Panama, Turkey, and Nationalist China
(Department of State Instruction, 28 March 1955,
Box 1538, Folder 398.245, NARA RG 59).
Herrington crafted the agenda to showcase
American fisheries science, specifically the work of
Milner B. Schaefer, director of the IATTC, on the
rapidly growing American tuna fishery in the
Pacific. Schaefer presented two papers, the first
suggesting an approach to fisheries research and the
second detailing the spectacular success of the
American tuna fishery off Latin America (Schaefer
1955a, b). During 1953, American boats had taken
274 million pounds of tuna, mainly off Peru,
encapsulating one of the reasons why Latin
Americans were so unhappy with the American
fleet.
Schaefer’s tuna paper reflects the two critical
assumptions that were made at Rome: (1) the

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

biological assumption that fish populations had
“surplus” production that could safely be harvested
and that scientists would be able to pinpoint these
harvest targets, and (2) the economic assumption
that when catches dropped, fishing would decline
because it was no longer economic for fishing to
continue. The fishery did not need to be regulated
because free market forces controlled effort.

being managed at close to MSY levels and
management intervention, in the form of restrictions
to slow the catch, was not warranted. When the
stocks had recovered to MSY levels, the fishing
level could be increased. Subsequently, many
scientists would question the validity of the second
set of data points, and their fit to what would come
to be called a Schaefer curve (McGoodwin 1990).

Schaefer’s tuna paper featured his reconstruction of
the tuna catch through the 1930s, from logbooks
kept by fishermen. Schaefer had used the data to
plot the catch, effort, and size distribution of
yellowfin (Thunnus albacares). The yellowfin data
(Fig. 2) generally show two clusters: a tight one in
the data from 1934–1945, close to the rising arc of
the dome-shaped curve, as the fish grew and put on
weight. A second set of data points recorded the
post-war catch, clustered near the peak of the curves,
when the population is at its maximum. A critical
omission was that Schaefer had been unable to find
a way to age tuna.

Schaefer’s whole biological–economic model
presumed that markets were open, when in fact they
were not. Through the centuries, many fisheries had
enjoyed subsidies of various sorts, such as bounties
on the catching of cod in New England (Morison
1941). Especially after 1945, governments
embarked on a series of subsidies for the fishing
industry in most industrialized countries, including
the U.S., Britain, Japan, and the Soviet Union. The
scale and range of the subsidies varied, but
substantial amounts of government money were
invested into the fishing industries of most
developed nations. The development of fisheries in
poorer countries, through such programs as the
FAO, also acted to subsidize fisheries development.
Government programs subsidized the cost of
building boats and processing facilities, and the
development and marketing of new fish products,
most through low-interest loans. Tariffs are also a
form of subsidy, and various countries introduced
protective measures to protect their fishermen from
low-cost imports.

Schaefer concluded that in 1953, yellowfin tuna
appeared to be fished at near MSY levels, but danger
of serious overfishing had decreased and
construction of new vessels was not economically
attractive (Schaefer 1955b). Schaefer’s analysis fit
an economic theory widely publicized in the 1930s,
that fish stocks could not be exterminated because
as soon as the fish were thinned and fishing was no
longer profitable, fishing would decline, thanks to
business failure (Taylor 1930). In other words, open
markets would solve the biological problem, with
no need for fishing restrictions. Skipjack
(Katsuwonus pelamis) runs fluctuated greatly but,
despite heavy fishing, showed no signs of decline.
Fishing could substantially increase before reaching
MSY levels.
Schaefer’s curve clearly illustrated the argument he
was making: fish had surplus production that could
safely be harvested, and when the catch per unit
effort (CPUE) dropped, fishing would slow and the
stocks would be given time to rebound to optimal
levels. Introducing restrictions as the catch was
increasing was not necessary. The fishery could
regulate itself.
Although surplus production theory purported to be
based on biology, it rested on an economic trigger:
a decline in the CPUE. In Schaefer’s yellowfin
example, economic conditions had halted the
expansion of fishing. Therefore, the fishery was

When fish catches fell, the economic incentive to
leave the industry was neutralized by government
actions. If anything, once government spending was
established, subsidies continued, creating the
pressure for more assistance, and continually
thwarting the expected corrective action of the
markets (Ludwig et al. 1993, Schrank 1998). In a
truly sociologically flexible system, where
fishermen could easily enter and leave fisheries to
take other employment during bad times, this
economic trigger might have worked. But the
fisheries market was not open. Government
subsidies (initiated for both domestic and foreign
policy reasons) were extensive and expanding, and
most fishermen had no other occupations to turn to
when fishing was poor (Fisheries Research Board
of Canada 1956, Vickers 1994).
As adopted in 1955, MSY meant that countries
could not act to restrict fishing by foreign boats until
it could be established scientifically that stocks were
being depleted and the attainment of MSY

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

Fig. 2. Schaefer’s curve showing yellowfin tuna populations and the catch from 1934–1953 (Source:
Schaefer 1955b).

jeopardized (papers of D. B. Finn, misc. notes, 1955
Conference, Folder 14, FAO 14 FI 159 RG 14). This
was a substantial burden of proof that smaller
countries, such as Peru, Ecuador, and Chile, found
difficult to meet.
By refusing to place restrictions on fisheries as they
were being developed, the 1955 meeting justified
the expenditure of government funds to expand
fishing throughout the world’s oceans. This
government money contributed to overcapitalization,
one of the most difficult problems in regulating
fisheries (Christy 1997).
Another of the legacies of this 1955 meeting is the
establishment of a pattern that is still repeated 60
years later, of taking fish without regulation until

critical biological estimates have been reached.
Measures to slow or halt fishing have mixed success
in conserving stocks. The development of derby or
Olympic fisheries have also had substantial social
costs to fishermen and have increased costs to
managers (Healey 1998)
American actions substantially shaped both the
direction of fisheries science and the fisheries
management process in three ways. First, the actions
at Rome prevented the implementation of
restrictions on fisheries as they were being
developed. Second, the U.S. rejected any discussion
of an international management organization with
binding authority to regulate fishing and the
territorial questions it raised, in favor of the creation
of bilateral and multilateral commissions, generally

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

with limited regulatory authority. Third, the U.S.
influenced the institutionalization of the idea that
fish stocks had “surplus” that could safely be
harvested, paving the way for the development of
derby fishing. This last factor assumed that
scientists would soon have the ability to predict
these critical harvest points—or MSY—and that
effective action could be taken to rein in fishing.
The establishment of MSY has generally been
interpreted as being a positive step for global
fisheries as this science-based concept would result
in the safe development of fisheries while sustaining
stocks in perpetuity (Scheiber 1989, Hubbard 2006).
Global fish catches increased by 6.8% a year
through the 1950s (from 18.5 million mt in 1950 to
31.2 million in 1959), assuring policy makers and
scientists that the adoption of MSY had been wise
and prudent (Garcia and Newton 1994).
This perception of scientific management was
strengthened by the publication in the early 1950s
of what biologist Tim B. Smith calls the three partial
theories of MSY. The yield per recruit theory, by
British scientists Raymond Beverton and Sidney
Holt, dealt with estimating the maximum yield from
each cohort of a fish population. The spawner and
recruit theory, devised by Canadian William Ricker,
estimated the optimum number of spawners for each
year class of fish. Schaefer’s surplus production
theory estimated the maximum total harvest of fish
every year from a standing population (Smith 1994).
Smith wrote that the three theories came to dominate
fisheries research for more than four decades but
that biologists were unable to find a way to unify
them into a comprehensive management regime.
This “defined narrow terms of reference for the
future study of fisheries biology,” he wrote (Smith
1994).
I contend that the three partial theories could not be
successfully unified in a comprehensive scientific
theory because MSY was driven more by its policy
concerns than by its science. The 1955 Rome
meeting was described by its planners and
participants as being “scientific and technical,”
designed to provide guidance to the International
Law Commission. However, the meeting was a
political one, held in response to actions by Latin
American countries, seeking to restrict American
fishing for baitfish. The American position was
shared by several European nations, concerned that
countries such as Iceland also were moving to
restrict fishing by foreign boats.

Estimating MSY from the partial theories depends
on high-quality data, which cannot be obtained from
fisheries as they develop because regulations are
prohibited until the fishery shows signs of
overfishing. The MSY has to be exceeded before it
can be established (Hilborn and Walters 1992).
Policy makers showcased MSY and pushed for its
adoption because it supported their objective—
upholding the freedom of the seas and the right of
industrialized nations to continue to fish wherever
their technology allowed them to do so.
The adoption of MSY was not unanimous. In
particular, Britain’s chief fisheries scientist,
Michael Graham, argued vigorously during the
planning for the Rome meeting and during the
conference itself, that MSY was not an appropriate
goal for fisheries management (Graham 1955).
Graham argued the focus should be on “controlling
man’s activities so as to produce the maximum
sustainable yield of products in a form most useful
to man,” (British Archives, MAF 209/32 summary
record of an informal meeting held in London on 9–
10 February 1955). D. B. Finn, head of the fisheries
division of the FAO, which hosted the meeting, also
opposed the MSY goal, arguing that it was a
theoretical concept with no scientific agreement
about its meaning. He thought it was not an
appropriate goal for management (papers of D. B.
Finn, FAO 14 Fl 159 RG 14, Folder April–May 1954
conference).
Finn assigned Sidney Holt, who had moved to the
FAO in 1952, to write a critique of MSY and
Schaefer’s surplus production theory, but although
the paper went through four drafts, it was not
included in the conference’s published documents.
Holt argued against research aimed at estimating a
“critical point” for ocean fishery management. He
said the objective could only be met with an
“infinitely high fishing intensity and hence at a
correspondingly high cost; it is therefore a totally
unreal objective for resource use” (papers of D. B.
Finn, FAO 14 Fl 159 RG 14, Folder April–May 1954
conference, italics in the original). Holt meant that
excess harvesting capacity would develop under an
MSY scenario.
Graham argued in “The Fish Gate” that unlimited
fisheries were unprofitable (Graham 1943). He had
hired Beverton and Holt to pursue his hypothesis
that a conservative fishing regime, with restrictions
imposed early, produced a greater yield of fish and
protected stocks that had not yet spawned (Beverton

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

and Holt 1957). But at the Rome meeting, when it
came time to vote on the structure and form of future
fisheries science, the head of the British delegation,
Minister of Fisheries Ronald Wall, supported the
American position. Britain was also interested in its
own line of fishing boats in foreign waters—
including Newfoundland and New England.
Graham’s preferred course of action—the
introduction of restrictions as a fishery was growing
—could have supported the political positions of
Peru, Ecuador, and Chile, which were attempting to
control American bait fishing off their coasts. It also
would have supported the position of Iceland, which
had encouraged the United Nations to hold the
conference in the first place.
After the Rome conference ended, Herrington and
Chapman drove to Geneva, for the meeting of the
International Law Commission. The ILC accepted
the “technical advice” of the Rome meeting and
MSY was adopted at the policy level in 1958. A
theoretical concept, MSY is reinforced by its
existence in multiple fields, first as policy, then as
science, then as a legal construct adopted in national
and international treaties. The criticism that was
leveled at the adoption of MSY had dropped from
sight and there have been no further attempts to
create an international body with binding authority
to rule in fisheries disputes. The overall shape of
modern fisheries management was fixed at Rome
on a scientific foundation that was distorted by
political objectives and contained several untested
assumptions about fish stocks.

pressure. The policy makers also assumed an open
market, when in fact most of the countries involved
were substantially subsidizing fisheries for a variety
of social, political, and economic objectives.
The existence of MSY in multiple realms—
politically, scientifically, and legally—has reinforced
its perception as being based in science rather than
in policy. With the focus firmly on establishing
harvest points for individual fish, our attention has
been diverted away from the overall impact of
fishing on ocean ecosystems. The failure of MSY
to protect stocks has contributed to public
disillusionment over the ability of scientists to
manage resources.
Once established at the policy level, MSY proved
to be resilient indeed. It became institutionalized
and the early criticism of its scientific weaknesses
was forgotten (Holt and Talbot 1978, Barber 1988).
It has also been entrenched at a deeper level, where
it has acted as a legal and political instrument that
controlled scientific ideas about how nature works.
This entrenchment at the legal, political, and
philosophical levels has contributed to the
persistence of MSY. But the establishment of MSY
in the first place owed more to justifying a political
and economic agenda than it did to sustaining fish
stocks.
Responses to this article can be read online at:
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/responses/

CONCLUSIONS

Acknowledgments:

Policy makers at Rome (and certainly some of the
scientists) saw the science as being on the verge of
not only understanding the ocean, but having a
certain ability to control its processes. Man and his
technology were benevolent forces in a hostile
natural world. The Rome delegates approved three
resolutions, including language that the immediate
aim of conservation was to conduct fishing activities
so as to increase, or at least sustain, the yield of
fishing. “Scientifically sound” measures were also
to be taken to improve the resource.

Thank you to Sidney Holt, Jim Lichatowich, Tony
Koslow, and Dan Bottom for discussions around this
paper.

A critical misunderstanding at Rome was
underestimating the fishing capacity of the fleet that
was being built and overestimating the ability of fish
to reproduce in the face of such enormous fishing

Barber, W. E. 1988. Maximum sustained yield lives
on. North American Journal of Fisheries
Management 8(2):153–157.

LITERATURE CITED
Allard, D. C. Jr. 1978. Spencer Fullerton Baird and
the U.S. Fish Commission. Arno Press, New York,
New York, USA.

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

Beverton, R. J. H. 1994. The state of fisheries
science. Pages 25–54 in C. Voitlander, editor. The
state of the world’s fisheries resources. International
Science Publisher, Lebanon, New Hampshire,
USA.
Beverton, R. J. H., and S. J. Holt. 1957. On the
dynamics of exploited fish populations. Chapman
and Hall, London, UK.
Bottom, D. L. 1997. To till the waters: a history of
ideas in fisheries conservation. Pages 569–597 in
D. J. Stouder, P. A. Bisson, and R. J. Naiman,
editors. Pacific salmon and their ecosystems: status
and future options. Chapman and Hall, New York,
New York, USA.
Bottom, D. L., K. K. Jones, C. A. Simenstad, and
C. L. Smith. 2009. Reconnecting social and
ecological resilience in salmon ecosystems.
Ecology and Society 14(1): 5. [online] URL: http://
www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art5/.

Dunn, R. J. 2002. William Francis Thompson
(1889–1965) and his pioneering studies of Pacific
halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis). Marine Fisheries
Review 63(2):5–14.
Eckes, A. E. 1992. Trading American interests.
Foreign Affairs 71(4):135–54.
Finlayson, A. C. 1994. Fishing for truth: a
sociological analysis of northern cod stock
assessments from 1977–1990. Memorial University
of Newfoundland, St. John’s, Newfoundland,
Canada.
Fisheries Research Board of Canada. 1956. The
commercial fisheries of Canada. Department of
Fisheries of Canada and the Fisheries Research
Board, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Francis, R. C. 1980. Fisheries science now and in
the future: a personal view. New Zealand Journal
of Marine and Freshwater Research 14(1):95–100.

Chapman, W. M. 1949. United States policy on
high seas fisheries. U.S. Department of State,
Washington, D.C., USA. Bulletin XX:67–80.

Fraser, N., P. Jacobson, M. Ottoway, and L.
Chester. 1977. Aristotle Onassis. Times Newspaper
Limited, London, UK.

Christy, F. 1997. Economic waste in fisheries:
impediments to change and conditions for
improvement. Pages 28–39 in E. K. Pikitch, D. D.
Huppert, and M. P. Sissenwine. Global trends,
fisheries management. American Fisheries Society,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Garcia, S. M., and C. Newton. 1994. Current
situation, trends, and prospects in world capture
fisheries. Pages 3–27 in E. K. Pikitch, D. D.
Huppert, and M. P. Sissenwine. Global trends,
fisheries management. American Fisheries Society,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Cooley, R. A. 1963. Politics and conservation: the
decline of Alaska salmon. The Conservation
Foundation, New York, New York, USA.

Graham, M. 1943. The fish gate. Faber and Faber
Limited, London, UK.

Cortner, H. J., and M. A. Moote. 1999. The politics
of ecosystem management. Island Press, Washington,
D.C., USA.

———. 1955. A first approximation to a modern
theory of fishing. Pages 56–57 in Proceedings,
International Technical Conference for the
Conservation of the Living Resources of the Sea, 18
April–10 May 1955, Rome, Italy. United Nations
Publications 1956, IIB1.

Dewar, M. E. 1983. Industry in trouble: the federal
government and the New England fisheries. Temple
University Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
Doel, R. E. 1997. Scientists as policymakers,
advisors, and intelligence agents: linking
contemporary diplomatic history with the history of
contemporary science. Pages 215–244 in Thomas
Soderqvist, editor. The historiography of
contemporary science and technology. Harwood
Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Hamblin, J. D. 2005. Oceanographers and the cold
war: disciples of marine science. University of
Washington Press, Seattle, Washington, USA.
Hannesson, R. 1996. Fisheries mismanagement:
the case of the North Atlantic cod. Fishing News
Books, Oxford, UK.
Hays, S. P. 1959. Conservation and the gospel of
efficiency. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

Massachusetts, USA.
Healey, M. C. 1998. The paradox of fairness: the
impact of escalating complexity on fisheries
management. Marine Policy 22(2):109–118, 115.
Healey, M. C. 2009. Resilient salmon, resilient
fisheries for British Columbia. Ecology and Society
14(1): 2. [online] URL: http://www.ecologyandsoc
iety.org/vol14/iss1/art2/.
Hilborn, R., and C. J. Walters. 1992. Quantitative
fisheries stock assessment: choice, dynamics and
uncertainty. Chapman and Hall, New York, New
York, USA.
Hirt, P. 1994. A conspiracy of optimism:
management of the national forests since World War
II. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, Nebraska,
USA.
Hollick, A. L. 1978. The roots of U.S. fisheries
policy. Ocean Development and International Law
Journal 5(1):61–105.
——— 1981. U.S. foreign policy and the law of the
sea. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
Jersey, USA.
Holling, C. S., and G. K. Meffe. 1996. Command
and control and the pathology of natural resource
management. Conservation Biology 10(2):328–
337.
Holm, P., T. D. Smith, and D. J. Starkey. 2001.
Introduction. Pages xiii–xix in P. Holm, T. D. Smith,
and D. J. Starkey. The exploited seas: new directions
for marine environmental history. Memorial
University Press, St. John’s, Newfoundland,
Canada.

Hutchings, J. A., and R. A. Myers. 1995. The
biological collapse of Atlantic cod off Newfoundland
and Labrador. Pages 25–44, in R. Arnson and L.
Felt, editors. The North Atlantic fisheries:
successes, failures and challenges. University of
Prince Edward Island Press, Charlottetown, Prince
Edward Island, Canada.
Huxley, T. H. 1883. Inaugural address. Fisheries
Exhibition Literature 4:1–22.
Josephson, P. R. 2002. Industrialized nature: brute
force technology and the transformation of the
natural world. Island Press, Washington, D.C.,
USA.
Kishinouye, K. 1923. Contributions to the
comparative study of the so-called scombroid
fishes. Journal of the College of Agriculture,
Imperial University of Tokyo 8(3):293–475.
Krige, J. 2006. American hegemony and the
postwar reconstruction of science in Europe. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Kyle, H. M. 1905. Statistics of the North Sea
fisheries. Part III. Summary of the available
fisheries statistics and their value for the solution of
the problem of overfishing. Rapports, Conseil
Permanent International pour l’Exploration de la
Mer 3.
Larkin, P. A. 1977. An epitaph for the concept of
maximum sustained yield. Transactions of the
American Fisheries Society 106(1):1–11.
Leslie, S. W. 1993. The cold war and American
science. Columbia University Press, New York,
New York, USA.

Holt, S., and L. M. Talbot. 1978. New principles
for the conservation of wild living resources.
Wildlife Monographs 59.

Lichatowich, J. 1999. Salmon without rivers: a
history of the Pacific salmon crisis. Island Press,
Washington, D.C., USA.

Hubbard, J. 2006. A science on the scales: the rise
of Canadian Atlantic fisheries biology, 1898–1939.
University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Ludwig, D., R. Hilborn, and C. Walters. 1993.
Uncertainty, resource exploitation, and conservation:
lessons from history. Science 260(17):17–36.

Hublou, W. F., J. Wallis, T. B. McKee. D. K. Law,
R. O. Sinnhuber, and T. C. Yu. 1959. Development
of the Oregon Moist Pellet Diet. Research Briefs,
Fish Commission of Oregon 7(1):28–56.

McEvoy, A. F. 1986. The fisherman’s problem:
ecology and law in the California fisheries.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
———. 1988. Towards an interactive theory of

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

nature and culture: ecology, production, and
cognition in the California fishing industry. Pages
211–229 in D. Worster, editor. The ends of the earth:
perspectives on modern environmental history.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
McGoodwin, J. R. 1990. Crisis in the world’s
fisheries: people, problems and politics. Stanford
University Press, Stanford, California, USA.
Morison, S. E. 1941. The maritime history of
Massachusetts, 1783–1860. Houghton Mifflin
Company, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Robbins, W. 1997. Landscapes of promise: the
Oregon story: 1900–1940. University of Washington
Press, Seattle, Washington, USA.
Roberts. C. 2007. The unnatural history of the sea.
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.
Rozwadowski, H. M. 2002. The sea knows no
boundaries: a century of marine science at ICES.
University of Washington Press, Seattle, Washington,
USA.
Russell, E. S. 1942. The overfishing problem.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Oreskes, N., and R. Rainger. 2000. Science and
security before the atomic bomb: the loyalty case of
Harold U. Sverdrup. Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics 31(3):309–369.

Scarnecchia, D. L. 1988. Salmon management and
the search for values. Canadian Journal of Fisheries
and Aquatic Sciences 45(11):2042–2050, 2–44.

Parsons, L. S., and J. S. Beckett. 1994. Fisheries
management in Canada: the case of Atlantic
groundfish. Pages 73–79 in E. K. Pikitch, D. D.
Huppert, and M. P. Sissenwine. Global trends,
fisheries management. American Fisheries Society,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Schaefer, M. B. 1955a. The scientific basis for a
conservation program. Pages 15–55 in Proceedings,
International Technical Conference for the
Conservation of the Living Resources of the Sea, 18
April–10 May 1955, Rome, Italy. United Nations
Publications 1956, IIB1.

Paterson, T. G. 1992. On every front: the making
and unmaking of the cold war. W. W. Norton and
Company, New York, New York, USA.

———. 1955b. Scientific investigation of the
tropical tuna resources of the eastern Pacific. Pages
194–221 in Proceedings, International Technical
Conference for the Conservation of the Living
Resources of the Sea, 18 April–10 May 1955, Rome,
Italy. United Nations Publications 1956, IIB1.

Pauly, D. 1994. On the sex of fish and the gender
of scientists. Chapman and Hall, London, UK.
Pauly, D., V. Christensen, S. Guenette, T. J.
Pitcher, U. R. Sumaila, C. J. Walters, R. Watson,
and D. Zeller. 2002. Towards sustainability in
world fisheries. Nature 418:689–695.
Pauly, D., and J. Maclean. 2003. In a perfect
ocean: the state of fisheries and ecosystems in the
North Atlantic ocean. Island Press, Washington, D.
C., USA.

Schaller, M. 1985. The American occupation of
Japan: the origins of the cold war in Asia. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK.
Scheiber, H. N. 1989. Origins of abstention doctrine
in ocean law: Japanese–U.S. relations and the
Pacific fisheries, 1937–1958. Ecology Law
Quarterly 16:23–101.

Pope, P. E. 2004. Fish into wine: the Newfoundland
plantation in the seventeenth century.University of
North Carolina Press, London, UK and Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, USA.

———. 2001. Inter-allied conflicts and ocean law,
1945–1953: the occupation command’s revival of
Japanese whaling and marine fisheries. Institute of
European and American Studies, Academic Sinica,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Rainger, R. 2001. Constructing a landscape for
postwar science: Roger Revelle, the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, and the University of
California, San Diego. Minerva 39:327–352.

Schrank, W. B. 1998. The failure of the Canadian
seasonal fishermen’s unemployment insurance
reform during the 1960s and 1970s. Marine Policy
22(1):67–81.

Ecology and Society 14(1): 6
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art6/

Sharp, G. D. 1995. It’s about time: new beginning
and old good ideas in fisheries science. Fisheries
Oceanography 4(4):324–341.

a fishing industry and its international
ramifications—the end of an era. Arizona State
University Press, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

Shelbourne, J. E. 1971. The Artificial Propagation
of Marine Fish. Second edition. The Academic
Press, Jersey City, New Jersey, USA.

Wright, M. 2001. A fishery for modern times: the
state and the industrialization of the Newfoundland
fishery, 1934–1968. Oxford University Press,
London, UK.

Smith, B. L. R. 1990 American science policy since
World War II. The Brookings Institute, Washington,
D.C., USA.
Smith, T. 1994. Scaling fisheries: the science of
measuring the effects of fishing, 1855–1955.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Stone, L. 1884. The artificial propagation of salmon
in the Columbia River basin. Transactions of the
American Fish Cultural Association 13:21–31.
Supreme Commander Allied Powers. 1949.
Japan’s natural resources, a comprehensive survey.
Hosakawa Printing Company, Tokyo, Japan.
Taylor, H. F. 1930. Trends of progress in the fish
industry. Canadian Fisheries Annual, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
Thompson, W. H. 1936. Conservation of the
Pacific halibut, an international experiment.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., USA.
Tonnessen, J. N., and A. O. Johnsen. 1982. The
history of modern whaling. R. I. Christophersen,
translator. C. Hurst and Company and Australian
National University Press, London, UK and
Canberra, Australia.
U.S. Navy. 1944. The fishing industry of the
Japanese mandated islands. Office of the Chief of
Naval Operations, Washington, D.C., USA.
Vickers, D. 1994. Farmers and fishermen: two
centuries of work in Essex County, Massachusetts,
1630–1830. University of North Carolina Press,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
Watt, D. C. 1979. First steps in the enclosure of the
oceans: the origins of Truman’s proclamation on the
resources of the continental shelf, 28 September
1945. Marine Policy 3(3):211–224.
Wolff, T. 1980. In pursuit of tuna: the expansion of

