See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/226952990

The lobster ﬁefs: Economic and ecological effects of
territoriality in the maine lobster industry
Article in Human Ecology · July 1975
DOI: 10.1007/BF01531640

CITATIONS

READS

316

1,233

1 author:
James M. Acheson
University of Maine
105 PUBLICATIONS 5,669 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by James M. Acheson on 18 December 2014.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Human Ecology. VoL 3, No. 3. 1975

The Lobster Fiefs" Economic and Ecological Effects
of Territoriality in the Maine Lobster Industry
James M. A c h e s o n 1

Received May 20, 19 74; revised September 16, 19 74

Lobstermen from each community along the coast o f central Maine claim inshore fishing rights in particular areas. Although their claims are unrecognized by
the state, they are well established and backed by surreptitious violence. Two
kinds o f lobsteting territories exist, here termed "'nucleated" and "perimeterdefended, "which differ essentially in the extent to which exclusive fishing rights
are maintained. These differences in territorial organization affect the fishing
effort o f lobstermen, which in turn has a strong biological and economic" impact.
KEY WORDS: lobster fishing;territoriality; common property resources; Maine.

INTRODUCTION

Fisheries throughout the world are characterized by a persistent and, in
some cases, disastrous tendency toward overexploitation. The most important
and widely accepted cause is the common property or "open-access" nature of
legal rights in the marine environment (Christy and Scott, 1965; Gordon, 1954:
132). In the absence of ownership, fishermen have no incentives to curtail fishing activities in response to declines in catches or increases in costs, because no
property fight guarantees that fish not taken today will be available in large
quantity or at greater weight in tile future. What one fisherman does not catch
today simply goes to the other fishermen (Crutchfield, 1973:116-117).
The research on which this paper is based was financed by the National Marine Fisheries
Service (Contract No. N-043-30-72) and a Faculty Research Grant from the Universityof
Maine in 1973.
1Department of Anthropology, University of Maine, Orono, Maine. (On leave 1974-1975 to
serve with the National Marine Fisheries Service, Washington,D.C.)
183
9
Plenum Publishing C o r p o r a t i o n , 227 West 1 7 t h Street, New Y o r k , N . Y . 1 0 0 1 1 . No
part o f this p u b l i c a t i o n may be r e p r o d u c e d , stored in a retrieval system, or t r a n s m i t t e d , in
any f o r m or b y a n y means, electr onic, mechanical, p h o t o c o p y i n g , m i c r o f i l m i f f g , recording,
or otherwise, w i t h o u t w r i t t e n permission of the publisher.

184

Acheson

Accordingly, the fishing industry o f the United States is having serious
long-term difficulties, recently exacerbated by intense competition with foreign
fishing fleets. In the New England area, cod, haddock, hake, and mackerel are far
less plentiful than they were in the past, and the once flourishing sardine industry has been reduced to a shadow o f its former self. In Maine, the site of our
research and traditionally one o f the most productive lobstering regions in the
Atlantic, lobster landings have decreased very rapidly in recent years (Maine Sea
and Shore Fisheries, 1973).
However, the lobster industry o f Maine is an unusual fishery in that informal norms about territoriality and hence ownership do exist. Territorial
arrangements have a substantial economic and ecological impact, with implications for the management o f the Maine lobster fishing industry and for fisheries
management as a whole. While the lobster catch in Maine is lower than in the
past, the decrease appears to be highly differential: fishermen in some areas earn
higher incomes and have a different effect on the biomass than those in others.
Such differences can be explained in terms o f variations in lobster fishing rights
that exist in various parts of the Maine coast. 2

GENERAL FEATURES OF THE MAINE LOBSTER INDUSTRY
The American lobster (Homarusamericanus)is found in the waters off the
Atlantic Coast o f North America from Newfoundland to the Carolinas. However,
Maine consistently produces far more lobsters than any other state, and our
study area along the central Maine coast is one o f the most productive areas o f
all.
Throughout the 1960s, there were approximately 6000 lobstermen in
Maine. About 2800 of these men were full-time fishermen; the remainder were
"part-timers" who earned most o f their income "ashore."
The technology employed by lobstermen along the entire length of the
Maine coast is relatively uniform. Lobsters are caught in wooden traps or "pots"
about 3 ft long made o f oak frames covered with hardwood lathes. Lathes are
placed about 1.5 inches apart, allowing free circulation o f sea water while retaining the larger, legal-sized lobsters (carapace length a o f over 3 3/16 inches and
under 5 inches). The open end o f the trap is fitted with a funnel-shaped nylon
2 Some biologists would argue that natural factors such as food supply, predation, competition, and water temperature have a more important effect on lobster stocks and landings
than the social and economic factors I am here concerned with. Water temperature fluctuations in Maine are highly correlated with landings for the period 1904-1967 (Dow, 1969).
However, I hold that property rights are also critical to differentials in lobster landings.
3It is standard practice in fisheries biology to measure lobsters (in millimeters) on the carapace, from the eye socket to the back of the body, where the carapace ends and the tail
begins.

The Lobster Fiefs

185

net or "head," which lets lobsters climb in easily but makes it difficult for them
to get out. Along the central part of the coast, the study area, one or sometimes
two traps are attached to a small styrofoam buoy via a "warp" (nylon or hemp
rope). 4 Distinctive sets of colors, registered with the state, mark the buoys
belonging to each lobsterman. Fish remnants obtained from nearby processing
plants constitute bait. The traps are usually placed in the water in "strings," or
long rows, so that a man can see from one buoy to another in the fog. On a good
day (usually the calm morning hours), a lobsterman in this area might pull about
200 traps. Typical lobstermen have about 400-600 traps.
Most lobstermen fish alone from gasoline- or diesel-powered boats 28-32
ft long, equipped with a depth sounder, hydraulic "pot" hauler, ship-to-shore
radio, and compass. In the island areas, boats may be somewhat larger, more
often diesel-powered, and also equipped with radar, so as to cope with the more
violent offshore seas and the fog. Capital investment in boats constructed at
present prices ranges from $13,000 to $17,000; besides the boat, a lobsterman
may have from $8000 to $10,000 invested in traps and fishing equipment, a
pickup truck, a dock, and some kind of workshop. Replacement values easily
run over $40,000.
A lobsterman's activities vary greatly from season to season. The midwinter months are unquestionably the slowest time of year. During January, February, and March, when lobsters can be caught only in relatively warm, deep water,
3-10 miles offshore, lobstering is generally more dangerous and unprofitable.
Bad weather and high winds increase trap losses and make the work more difficult. Some men stay ashore during this period to build lobster traps, while others
use their boats for scalloping or shrimping. Those who persist ill lobstering
during the winter may pull their traps no more than six or seven times a month.
As the water warms in the spring, lobsters are available in shallower water
closer to shore. Spring (April 15 to June 15) and fall (August 15 to November
15) are unquestionably the busiest months of the year, when men have a maximum number of traps in the water and pull them every chance they get. During
the 3- or 4-week molting season (June 15 to August 15, depending on the area),
traps are typically placed very close to shore -- literally feet away from breaking
surf. During this period, catches are so small that nien bring many of their traps
ashore and do maintenance work on their boats. In the fall, lobstermen begin to
move their equipment into deeper water again.
While all lobstermen move their traps according to this general pattern,
they are not all equally effective as fishermen. Skill and willingness to work
4 In the more southern part o f the state, around Casco Bay, it is customary to attach six to
ten traps to one "warp"; this practice is called "fishing trawls," in contrast to "fishing
singles." In the Casco Bay area, lobster fishermen have many more traps than in the central
region o f the Maine coast, and they fish with larger boats and two-man crews. On a good
day, a man "fishing trawls" might easily pull 350 traps while a man "fishing singles" could
pull about 200 traps.

186

Acheson

greatly affect catches and incomes. I know one very experienced man who has
300 traps and had a net income in 1972 of approximately $21,000. Another
man with only 5 years of experience, fishing in the same area with 900 traps,
had a net income of only $12,000. The first carefully places his traps in areas
known through experience to be productive; the second scatters them over the
bay.
Any sizable harbor has at least one lobster dealer who buys from local
lobstermen and sells to tourists or to one of the three or four large wholesale
firms distributing lobsters in Maine and the nation. While the prices lobstermen
receive do fluctuate seasonally, there is little price competition in the Maine
lobster industry. On any given day, all the dealers in the state are paying approximately the same price. Dealers compete for a supply of lobsters by attempting
to attach as many !obstermen to themselves as possible. They supply "their"
lobstermen with gas, oil, and bait at low margins of profit, allow them to use
their wharfs free of charge, and supply them with large amounts of credit. A few
fishermen sell to two or more dealers, and periodically a man will change from
one dealer to another in rapid succession. But typically a lobster fisherman
maintains a longstanding relationship with only one dealer and sells his catch
exclusively to that dealer.
The location of dealerships is not connected to lobster fishing areas. A
lobsterman usually sells to a dealer in his own home harbor, but he may sell to
any d e a l e r - regardless of location.
The federal government has made no effort to regulate the lobster industry, and the state of Maine has passed only a few conservation laws. To be
legally taken, a lobster must have a carapace length of over 3 3/16 inches and
under 5 inches. Regardless of size, breeding females are protected by a law requiring any lobsterman who catches an egg-bearing female to cut two notches in
her tail flipper and throw her back. "Notched-taft" lobsters may never be taken.
In addition, the state has a licensing requirement, and lobstermen must mark
their traps and buoys with their license number and assigned colors. Despite the
fact that only 37 state Sea and Shore Fisheries wardens patrol some 2500 miles
of coast, these laws are now almost universally obeyed. Violations can result in
court action and suspension of fishing licenses, which effectively bars lobstermen
from the fishery.
There are few data on the relative effectiveness of these formal, statewide
measures. However, in other lobstering regions and in other fisheries, such restrictive conservation laws have been found to exacerbate the problem of economic inefficiency and to have questionable effects on fish population levels
(Crutchfield and Pontecorvo, 1969; De Wolf, 1974). Certainly the Maine laws do
not begin to solve the problems inherent in managing a common property resource. They do not limit entry into the fishery and do little to restrict fishing
effort. However, the informal norms concerning territoriality certainly do

The Lobster Fiefs

187

operate to limit both. In all lobstering areas there are barriers to entry; and in
some areas there are special local rules about the number o f traps that may be
fished or about local fishing seasons.

TERRITORIALITY IN THE MAINE LOBSTER INDUSTRY
F r o m the legal view, anyone who has a license can go lobster fishing anywhere. In reality, far more is required. To go lobster fishing at all, one needs to
be accepted by the men fishing out o f one harbor; and once one has gained
admission to a "harbor gang, ''5 one is ordinarily allowed to go fishing only in
the traditional territory o f that harbor. Interlopers are met with strong sanctions, sometimes merely verbal, but more often involving the destruction of
lobstering gear. This entire territorial system is entirely the result of political
competition between groups o f lobstermen. It contains no "legal" or jural elements.
As a rule, the area fished b y any one harbor gang is quite small. In the
summer, a man will rarely fish more than 3 or 4 miles from his home harbor, and
even in winter, when men are fishing in deeper water, they are rarely more than
10 miles from home. Territories fished b y one harbor gang are rarely more than
100 square miles; most are far smaller. This means that a lobsterman spends his
working life crossing and recrossing one small b o d y o f water.
The dividing lines between most lobstedng territories are relatively minor
features which would be familiar only to men intimately acquainted with the
area (see Fig. 1). Along shore, a rock, ledge, cove, or perhaps a big pine tree may
mark a boundary. Offshore, boundaries are usually marked by reference to
landmarks onshore or on islands.
To some extent, delineation o f boundaries varies with distance from shore.
Close to shore, boundaries are k n o w n to the yard. Farther offshore, boundaries
are less definite. Thus in the middle o f the winter, when men are fishing far from
shore, there is a good deal o f "mixed fishing" between two harbor gangs. In part,
this pattern can be explained b y the fact that it is simply more difficult to estabfish exact boundaries far from shore. More important is the relative competition
s While the men fishing out of one harbor form very definite social entities, they do not have
universally recognized names. One refers to the "Monhegan boys" or the "Friendship
fishermen" or the "Pemaquid Harbor gang." I refer to these groups as "harbor gangs,"
although this term is used only rarely by the fishermen themselves. Usually the fishermen
from one community form a harbor gang, but this is not always the case. For example,
some of the men who live in the village of New Harbor fish out of Pemaquid Harbor and
others out of New Harbor itself. Moreover, the men who fish the areas around some of the
unoccupied islands in Penobscot Bay live onshore and commute daffy to the islands to fish.
Even though they may reside in different towns, they form some of the most cohesive
harbor gangs along the entire coast.

Fig. 1. Map of lobster fishing territories along the coast of central Maine.

hAVTI~ L MIL~

~/arbor

I AR~A

~r
r

oo

The Lobster Fiefs

189

for fishing bottom. In the winter, lobsters are available over a wider area and
fewer men are fishing. In the summer, when more men are fishing shallow areas
along shore, there is more competition and more interest in maintaining exact
boundaries.
Violation of territorial boundaries meets with no set response. An older,
well-established man from a large family might infringe on the territorial rights
of others almost indefinitely, whereas a new man or a "part-timer" would almost
certainly have trouble very quickly. Sooner or later, however, someone -- usually
one man acting completely on his own -- will decide to sanction the interloper.
First, the violator may be warned, usually by having his traps opened or by
having two half-hitches tied around the spindle of his buoys. If he persists, some
or all of his traps will be "cut off." That is, his traps will be pulled, the buoy,
toggles, and warp cut off, and the trap pushed over in deep water where he has
little chance of finding it.
Small-scale trap cutting is a constant problem all along the coast. There
are, however, factors keeping trap cutting at a minimum. Most important is the
knowledge that the destruction of traps will bring almost certain retaliation. Perhaps once a decade, these small incidents escalate into full "lobster wars," in
which dozens of men thrust against each other in widespread forays, destroying
large numbers of traps and even boats (Acheson, 1974).
All conflicts, regardless of how many men are involved, are kept very
quiet. No matter how justified a man feels in "cutting off" another man's gear,
he will rarely advertise his "skill with the knife." Trap cutting is illegal and can
lead to loss of license; silence reduces the chances of retaliation by victims. Thus,
when trap cutting occurs, people in coastal towns and state officials are apt to
hear only vague rumors, but not the details, from the primary actors themselves.
Even the victims remain silent because legal prosecution is usually unsuccessful
and there is a strong feeling among fishermen that the "law should be kept at a
distance." The result is what Bailey (1969: 144-147) calls an "encapsulated
system" -- one political system operating with its own set of rules within a larger
system.
There are two different types of lobster fishing areas along this part of the
central Maine coast. I am calling them here "nucleated" and "perimeter-defended" areas. 6 The lobstermen do not have terms for the different territorial
arrangements, although they are aware of the differences, which essentially
relate to the amount of mixed fishing allowed. In the western part of the study
area (between Cape Newagan and Friendship), territorial arrangements are
highly nucleated. That is, men from each harbor gang have a strong sense of
territoriality close to the mouth of the harbor where they anchor their boats.
6In a previous article (Acheson, 1974), I referred to the differences in these areas in terms of
"open" and "closed." I have abandoned this terminology as misleading and have adopted
these new terms from Hockett (1973: 69).

190

Acheson

But this sense of "ownership" grows progressively weaker the farther from the
harbor mouth one goes. On the periphery there is almost no sense of territoriality and a good deal of mixed fishing takes place. In fact, in this area virtually
all the deepwater fishing grounds exploited in the winter are fished by men from
at least two harbors. (Areas of overlap may be fished jointly by men from particular harbor gangs but are not open to men from any harbor.) A stranger trying
to fish in an area close to a harbor nucleus would almost certainly meet with
violent opposition from a number of men. However, the reaction would be much
less violent if he were to invade an area fished by multiple harbor gangs, where
the sense of ownership is weaker.
Farther east on the mainland (see Fig. 1), the territories are still basically
nucleated, although lobstermen say that boundaries become "harder," meaning
that there is less area where mixed fishing is allowed and that larger areas are
fished exclusively by men of a single harbor gang.
The island areas of Penobscot Bay are, however, perimeter-defended territories. Particularly in the cases of Monhegan, Matinicus, Green Island, Little
Green Island, and Metinic Island, boundaries are sharply drawn and defended to
a yard. Definition of the areas is in terms of their outermost boundaries, and the
feeling of ownership does not sharply decrease with distance from the island
harbors where the men anchor their boats. There is very little mixed fishing.
Even in winter, when fishing offshore in deep water, men from these perimeterdefended territories rarely venture into areas they do not claim for their exclusive use. Periodically, a man may furtively and guiltily put a few traps outside his
own area where he thinks no one will notice, but there is a strong feeling that if
one is going to keep others on their side of a boundary one should stay on one's
own side.
In both types of territories, but most clearly in the perimeter-defended
areas, claims over ocean areas are tied up with formal ownership of land. Ownership of land on an island is held to mean ownership of "fishing rights" in nearby
waters, despite the fact that legally the ocean areas are part of the public
domain. On Matinicus, for example, no one is allowed to fish in the island's territory unless he owns land on the island. A major argument against selling land to
"summer people" is that thereby an island family may lose its fishing rights. One
man bought a very small island in the Muscle Ridge channel solely to gain fishing
rights to adjacent waters. He does not live on the island, and does nothing else
with it except to use the surrounding ocean for lobster fishing.
In perimeter-defended areas, ownership rights to the waters are not merely
usufructuary. Even if the owner is not using his water territory, his fishing rights
remain, and may be rented out. In these areas, ownership rights are so strong
that men who own whole islands rent out "water areas" to men from nearby
mainland harbors. Most of the lobstermen fishing in the Metinic Island area, for
example, rent fishing rights from the two families who are legal owners of the

The Lobster Fiefs

191

island. The family members cannot completely exploit the island's water area,
and so they outfit several men from the mainland with boats and gear and allow
them to go fishing in their preserve. Arrangements vary considerably, but in
some cases the families take half the gross income o f these renters as return on
the capital equipment and as rent on the "water area." These rental rights are
traditionally held, and inherited patrilineally, as are land property rights.
A critical difference between nucleated and perimeter-defended territories
is the extent to which entry is more severely limited and controlled in the latter.
In nucleated areas it is relatively easy to gain acceptance to harbor gangs. If a
man is a resident of the c o m m u n i t y and shows a willingness to abide by local
fishing norms, he will eventually be accepted into the local harbor gang. 7 It is
vastly more difficult to gain admission to harbor gangs that maintain perimeterdefended territories. This is to be expected, given the nature o f such defensive
boundary arrangements. The object o f maintaining strict boundaries is to keep
down the number o f men fishing in an area. There is no sense in maintaining
sharply defined boundaries b y violence against other harbor gangs if anyone can
join o~.e's own gang. Thus, men who strongly defend the perimeters o f their territories also limit membership in their own harbor gangs to a much greater extent
than do men fishing in nucleated areas. As will be seen below, this results in
more fishing area per fisherman than is evident in nucleated areas.
Entry to harbor gangs in perimeter-defended areas is essentially limited to
men who belong to families owning the land and adjacent water areas, and to
men who are accepted on a rental basis. The unoccupied islands (Green Island,
Little Green Island, and Metinic) are each privately owned b y one or two families, whose members reserve all fishing rights solely for themselves. It is virtually
impossible for a newcomer to enter these harbor gangs, except in some instances
as a renter. A few newcomers, however, have been able to establish themselves as
fishermen on permanently occupied islands such as Matinicus and Monhegan.
Usually such men are already known to the islanders; several come from families
who have summered on an island for years, so that they grew up with island
children. Normally they begin fishing as helpers, or "stern-men," and eventually
7Entry into harbor gangs is, however, by no means "open." Admission depends on a combination of factors. In all nucleated harbors a man will most easily gain admission if his
family has long been resident in the town, if he began fishing as a boy and has gradually
become a full-time fisherman, and if his father is a fisherman. Such a man inherits a place
in his father's harbor gang. A man will have the most difficulty if he is not a long-term
resident, if he began fishing as an adult, if he plans to fish part-time, and if his family
has no connection with fishing. However, the most critical single factor is a man's willingness to abide by the local norms of the industry. One who gains a reputation for molesting other men's gear will not last long in the industry, regardless of family ties or
long residence. The strong prejudice against part-time fishermen can be explained by their
relative invulnerability to the effects of transgressing the norms; with little capital investment and with alternative means of employment, the part-time lobsterman may suffer
little from trap cutting and other sanctions.

192

Aeheson

are permitted to purchase land (if their families do not already own land) and to
become full-time fishermen. In the process these men are carefully scrutinized,
and would be rejected if they made any trouble or showed any unwillingness to
abide by local norms.

PROCESSES OF BOUNDARY MAINTENANCE AND CHANGE
Before 1920, all lobstering areas along the Maine coast were undoubtedly
perimeter-defended areas. While most of the areas are now nucleated, the advent
of such territories is a relatively recent phenomenon, and the change from perimeter-defended to nucleated areas is by no means complete.
Fifty years ago, lobstering was done only in the summer in very small territories held by small groups of men who defended them vigorously. In great part,
this pattern was connected to the technology in use. Since lobstering was done
from a sloop or dory, fishing in stormy winter waters was very difficult. Even in
summer, the area that one could fish was very limited,since one could learn the
bottom only by hand lead line and the travel radius was small. Since a man's
income was dependent on a very small area, he zealously maintained its boundaries. These small territories were typically held by a small group of kinsmen,
and were passed down to descendants patrilineally. Fishing areas were usually
adjacent to legally owned coastal property, where it was felt the landowner had
a right to the lobsters in the waters off his "very own property."
This pattern has persisted to the present day, as we have seen, around the
small privately owned islands of Penobscot Bay, around the large permanently
occupied islands farther out to sea (i.e., Matinicus and Monhegan), and to some
extent near the mainland harbors in the eastern part of the study area. In the
western part of the study area, this pattern has completely broken down. The
small perimeter-defended territories have been amalgamated into larger nucleated areas where most ocean area is fished by men from at least two harbors.
The breakdown of small, perimeter-defended territories was made possible
by technological change. As motors came into common use in the 1930s, the
range a lobsterman could fish increased. In the 1950s, the use of depthfinding
equipment, which made it relatively easy to learn the characteristics of the
bottom, further increased the effective range a lobsterman could fish. While the
new technology increased potential fishing area, one .cannot explain why the
older system of small perimeter-defended areas has persisted in the east and
around certain islands but has broken down completely in the western part of
the study area.~ As we have seen, the technology is the same along the entire
coast.
8The major criterion by which the lobstermen of this part of the Maine coast differentiate
between what we call nucleated and perimeter-defended areas is a perceived difference in

The Lobster Fiefs

193

Several different sets of factors have produced the differential boundary
breakdown. While these have been discussed in detail elsewhere (Acheson,
1974), several points bear repeating. First, boundary breakdown or maintenance
is the result of conflict and political pressure. Second, the willingness to defend a
boundary or invade another area depends on (1) the ability to form what Bailey
would call "political teams" (Bailey, 1969: Chap. 3) and (2) the alternate
income opportunities open to the men in question.
The technological and political factors, operating in different geographical
contexts, have produced the different kinds of areas we have been discussing. In
the western part of the study area, where the coast is strongly convoluted and
formed into deep bays, the traditional areas of communities on open ocean have
been under great pressure from men in towns farther up the rivers and bays.
Before the advent of engines, men from bay communities, such as Bremen and
Muscongus, had to restrict their fishing to the summer months when they could
catch lobsters in the waters close to their home harbors. During the past few
years, more and more men from such bay communities have been purchasing
larger boats capable of fishing in open ocean. Since one cannot cover the costs of
a $15,000 boat by using it only during the summer, these men must fish on a
year-round basis. This means that they must invade what were formerly the
exclusive territories of towns such as New Harbor and Friendship on open ocean.
Obviously, such men are willing to sacrifice a great deal to get to open water.
The alternative is to be bottled up in small traditional territories near their home
harbors where they can fish only a few months a year.
Thus, it is not surprising that the traditional perimeter-defended boundaries in areas at the mouths of estuaries have broken down, resulting in nucleated
fishing territories. Around Muscongus Bay and the deeply indented bays of the
Boothbay region, harbors on the ends of peninsulas are apt to have very small
areas for exclusive use. The rest are fished jointly with men from harbors farther
inland. The amount of mixing is especially great in winter, when men from more
inland harbors must come outside. However, perimeter-defended areas have been
maintained farther up these rivers and bays.
For the men in the invaded areas, it is not worthwhile to repel the interlopers. It is true that invasion means that men from harbors on open ocean will
have more competition in areas which they once held exclusively. This will
ultimately mean a smaller yield for them. However, an attempt to stop the men
their defenders' propensity for violence. Their explanations for the difference are usually in
cultural terms. Men from areas like Monhegan are believed to have traditional ideas about
territoriality, to be very secretive and competitive, to cooperate rarely, and to be prone to
use force and violence in defending their territories. Such "traditional" attitudes and
behaviors are linked to factors such as older age, less education, and greater isolation from
the outside world. None o f these characteristics accurately describes the violence-prone
m e n o f perimeter-defended areas, who are, in fact, better educated and more sophisticated
t h a n most m e n fishing nucleated territories.

194

Aeheson

from upriver from their incursions would mean a fun-scale "war," resulting in
large fmancial losses. Even though there is some bitterness directed toward the
men from bay communities, men from open-ocean harbor gangs feel it is better
to mix than fight.
The men from ocean harbors feel this situation is very unfair. They would
not mind yielding some of their exclusive areas if they could fish farther upriver
during the summer. There is a good deal of hard talk about the "river rats who
invade our areas but will not allow us to fish upriver." The invaders have a different point of view. As one of the older fishermen from a bay community phrased
it, " I f the old boundaries were maintained, we would have no place to fish much
of the time. We would all have to be part-time fishermen." They clearly have no
intention of reverting to part-time status again.
A combination of factors has allowed the small perimeter-defended areas to
be maintained around some of the islands in our study areas.
First, men from mainland harbors have not been aggressive in pushing into
these outer islands. Distance alone has had a dampening effect on the offensive
ardor of the mainlanders. Islands such as Monhegan and Matinicus are over an
hour from the nearest mainland harbor even for the fastest boats. Moreover,
mainland harbors in this part of the coast, e.g., Pleasant Point, Tenant's Harbor,
and Port Clyde, have both shoal water and deep water so that members of these
harbor gangs can go fishing year round without pushing into areas controlled by
other men. (In this respect, these areas are unlike upriver ones such as Round
Pond and Bremen.) Second, and more important, these mainland harbor gangs
are composed of larger numbers of men, who are not organized in ways that
allow political effectiveness in the long run. Friendship, for example, has about
95 lobster boats owned by men who live in at least three towns and who have
little in common besides occupation. The same is true of other mainland harbors
in the area. Periodically, one man or a few men will attempt to put traps in areas
controlled by island gangs, but their lack of organization prevents aggressive,
long-term efforts which would result in change in boundary lines. In fact, I am
aware of no instance where all the men of a nucleated territory have acted in
concert to defend their own territory or to invade another.
"Owners" of island areas have long put up a spirited defense of their
boundaries. Several factors have made them very effective.
These islands are owned and controlled by a small number of nuclear
households strongly linked by ties of agnatic kinship and their need for mutual
self-help. Their activities are customarily coordinated by older, experienced
adult men, who rule their sons and nephews with an iron hand, and who have a
great deal of influence over non-kin. Their small numbers, kinship ties, and a
longstanding tradition of cooperation make it relatively easy to coordinate the
defense of their lobstering area. 9
9The social organization of Maine offshore islands is the topic of a future publication.

The Lobster Fiefs

195

The vehemence of this defense is bolstered by the fact that residents of
islands do not have the alternative economic opportunities that men from mainland harbors have. Moreover, their long-term ownership of island property gives
them special claim to the adjacent ocean areas. At least one family has owned an
island since the mid-eighteenth century. In Maine, where virtue is attached to
remaining in the same place for a long time, this family's claim to its traditional
fishing area has strong moral overtones. Friends and enemies alike see the family
as preservers of a valued tradition or admired status quo. To a great degree, this
is true of all the perimeter-defended areas. The defensive posture of perimeterdefended areas is further enhanced by the fact that some prominent men from
these areas have been able to use their wealth and long residence in the area to
gain political eminence in the region as a whole. Thus, for the time being, there
are several areas along the coast where perimeter-defended areas remain - little
fiefs carved out of the public domain.

PERIMETER-DEFENDED VS. NUCLEATED AREAS:
DIFFERENTIAL EFFECTS ON THE ECONOMICS
AND ECOLOGY OF MAINE LOBSTERING

The remaining perimeter-defended territories are held by men who tend to
form highly effective political groupings which serve both to severely restrict
entry into the fishery of these areas and to enable to enactment of local conservation measures. Both these factors have produced great differences in fishing
effort between nucleated and perimeter-defended areas.
Differences in ease of entry into harbor gangs fishing the two different
kinds of areas have produced substantial variation in the number of boats (and
fishermen) per square mile. Data comparing three perimeter-defended areas with
three adjacent nucleated areas show that men from perimeter-defended areas
have far more fishing area per boat than those from nucleated areas (Table I).
In reality, the difference between the nucleated and perimeter-defended
areas is far greater than these figures indicate. First, in the nucleated areas, not
all of the ocean bottom is productive of lobsters. An estimated 25% of the area
fished by Friendship and New Harbor men is mud bottom. This rarely produces
lobsters. More important, much of the area fished by men from nucleated
harbors consists of zones of mixed fishing. Men from New Harbor, for example, fish over 44.7 square nautical miles of ocean. But only approximately 12.6
square nautical miles of that is fished exclusively by men from New Harbor. The
men from Port Clyde fish some 30.4 square nautical miles, but 13.3 square
nautical miles of that area they share with men from other harbors. By way of
contrast, all of the area "owned" by men in perimeter-defended territories produces lobsters at some time in the seasonal cycle; and no part of these territories
is fished with men from other harbor gangs. Thus, if the amount of productive

196

Acheson

Table 1. Square Miles per Boat in Nucleated vs. Perimeter-Defended Areasa

Harbor
Nucleated areas

Port Clyde
New Harbor
Friendship

Perimeter-defended
areas

Green Island
Metinic
(south end only)
Monhegan

Number of
boats

Total area
in square
nautical miles

Square
nautical
miles/boat

39
36
95

30.4
44.7
25.3

0.78
1.2
0.27

8
7

11
10.8

1.4
1.5

20

1.7

12

aOnly the boats of full-time fishermen have been counted. Part-time (skiff) fishermen have
been excluded. The number of boats, and not number of men, has been used since many
boats carry more than one man.

fishing b o t t o m and the amount o f mixed fishing were taken into account, the
ratio of square nautical miles per b o a t would be far lower than indicated in the
case o f these nucleated areas.
Since there are fewer boats per square mile in perimeter-defended areas,
and since men fishing in those areas use no more capital equipment per man than
those in nucleated areas, there is a great difference in the amount o f fishing
effort in these types o f territories. Thus, in perimeter-defended areas, a higher
p r o p o r t i o n o f the lobsters reaching the minimum legal size remain uncauooht and
grow to larger sizes.
Another difference between the two types of areas is that conservation
efforts are practiced in the perimeter-defended territories. The men fishing off
Matinicus Island, for example, have voluntarily agreed to limit the number o f
traps they fish. Such trap limits have two benefits. First, they increase a fisherm a n ' s profits b y lowering his production costs. A man with a small number o f
traps does not spend as much for trap stock, and usually pays less for bait, fuel,
and boat depreciation as well. Second, a man with fewer traps keeps better track
o f them, pulls t h e m more frequently, and loses fewer. This reduces lobster
mortality, since lobsters in lost traps are apt to be permanently incarcerated.
Moreover, when traps are pulled frequently, molting lobster which would otherwise have been eaten b y their brethren are released and given a better chance o f
survival.l~

1~
biologists are convinced that a very large number of lobsters are killed by being
caught in untended or lost traps. In the past, bills have been unsuccessfully introduced
requiring fishermen to pull their traps every 48 hr. At present, a "venting bill" is being
introduced. This would require that one lathe on each trap be made of some kind of wood
that rots quickly. Such traps, if lost, would automatically release their victims in time to
prevent excessive mortality.

The Lobster Fiefs

197

Trap limits do not cut down the total catch. When trap limits are imposed,
men dispense with the marginal t r a p s - those not fishing w e l l - and put the
remainder to better use so that yield per trap is increased. Thus, with a trap
limit, it may take men a little longer to catch the same volume of lobsters, but
over the course of the annual cycle the same catch is harvested, ix
Monhegan Island, another perimeter-defended territory, is attempting to
conserve the lobster resource in its area by imposing a closed season. The inhabitants of Monhegan have persuaded the legislature to pass a law forbidding fishing
in Monhegan waters from June 25 to January 1. Thus, Monhegan lobstermen are
fishing in midwinter when the price for lobster is very high and when they have
few other economic options. They put their traps "on the bank" in the summer
when they have alternate employment in the tourist industry, leaving the defense of their territory to the state fish wardens. This closed season keeps anyone from setting traps during the critical months of July and August, when fishing for molting lobsters would result in very high mortality.
It is critical to note that one man cannot gain the benefits of a trap limit
or closed season by unilaterally reducing the number of traps he fishes or the
number of months he fishes. If he reduces his fishing effort (and others do not),
he is obviously putting himself at a competitive disadvantage. But if everyone
reduces effort simultaneously, then each man will still catch his "fair share" of
lobsters. Such conservation measures will work only in areas where everyone
agrees to them. So far this has occurred only in perimeter-defended areas, where
harbor gangs are organized to enforce strong controls over the actions of their
members and defend their area. Such voluntary controls are not characteristic of
the relatively loosely organized harbor gangs fishing nucleated areas. These gangs
are unable to control their own members, to defend effectively much area for
their exclusive use, or to limit drastically the numbers of men they allow to fish
in their area.
There is a persistent rumor along the coast that men fishing in areas such
as Green Island, Monhegan, Matinicus, and other perimeter-defended areas earn
larger incomes and catch larger lobsters than men fishing anywhere else along the
coast. The reason, lobstermen explain, is that the "islanders reserve private fishing areas for themselves and keep everyone else out." A preliminary study
indicated that these rumors had some substance to them.
We hypothesized that the differences observed were due to the differences
in effort and fishing practices discussed above. To verify this set of hypotheses,
we set up a project to gather data on the relationships among type of territoriality (nucleated or perimeter-defended), income, catch size, fishing effort,
estimated stock density, and other measures. Two types of information were
~lThe Canadian government has instituted trap limits in a number of lobster fishing districts
in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia with no noticeable decrease in annual total harvest (De
Wolf, 1974).

198

Aeheson

collected. First, between June 1972 and May 1973, 28 lobstermen were persuaded to give detailed information on income and business expenses. Unfortunately, it was early in 1973 that the U.S. Internal Revenue Service began an
intensive investigation of the men in the Maine lobster industry. A very high
proportion of the fishermen in Maine were "overhauled" by the IRS. Many men
were forced to pay additional tax money, and several have been charged with
criminal fraud. Late in the spring of 1973, men had become so fearful and
suspicious of anyone asking information about income that this part of the project had to be dropped. However, enough data had been collected in the preceding months to allow us to come to tentative conclusions concerning the economic
effects of territoriality.
Second, 14 lobstermen from various harbors were asked to record data on
their catches twice a month from March 1973 through January 1974. On every
string of traps pulled, they recorded the date, location of the string, depth (in
fathoms), number of "setover days" (number of days since the trap was last
pulled and rebaited), and whether the string was in an area fished exclusively by
men of one harbor or in an area of mixed fishing. On every trap pulled, they
recorded another set of data: the carapace lengths of the legal-sized lobsters
caught in that trap and the length of the proven breeding stock, i.e., female lobsters carrying eggs or with notched tails. To facilitate the recording of these data,
the men were provided with metric calipers and data sheets. About a fourth of
the total information was obtained by members of the University staff who
accompanied the fishermen. Data were obtained on 9089 lobsters, of which
3327 were caught in nucleated areas and 5762 in perimeter-defended areas.
The lobstermen were chosen with a view toward controlling for several
important variables. To control for ecological differences, all were picked from
the same small study area. Seven men fish in nucleated areas, the other seven in
perimeter-defended areas. All areas in this part of the study are adjacent to each
other. In some cases, the men from nucleated areas are fishing only yards away
from the men from perimeter-defended areas.
Moreover, the amount of capital used by the men studied is comparable.
On this part of the coast, lobstermen use between 350 and 600 traps per man.
The exact number a particular man uses depends less o n the type of area he
fishes than on factors such as age, skill, and ambition. More men fishing the
offshore islands have larger diesel-powered boats with radar. But not all boats
on islands are large, and many men on the mainland have comparable investments in boats. In short, there is no obvious difference in the amount of capital
employed by the men in nucleated areas and by those in perimeter-defended
areas.
The lobstermen claim that a difference in skills makes an enormous difference in the number and size of lobsters caught. While there has been no research
on this point, I have little doubt that they are correct. To control for skills, all
the men chosen were full-time fishermen, with a reputation for marked success.

The Lobster Fiefs

199

From the information gathered during the carapace-measuring project,
there is unmistakable evidence that a reduction in fishing effort in the perimeter-defended areas has resulted in both biological and economic benefits.
Biological Benefits

First, the lobsters caught in the perimeter-defended areas are larger than
those caught in nucleated areas. This can be demonstrated by analyzing the frequency distribution of lobsters caught: 12
From Fig. 2, it can be seen that men catch a much higher percentage of
small lobsters in the nucleated areas than in the perimeter-defended areas, and a
higher percentage of larger lobsters in the perimeter-defended areas than in nucleated ones. For example, 8% of all lobsters caught in nucleated areas were 83
mm, but only 6.4% of those caught in perimeter-defended areas were. Additionally, 1.9% of the lobsters caught in perimeter-defended areas were 98 mm,
whereas only 0.8% of those caught in the nucleated areas were this big. Since a
high proportion of the lobsters which molt into the legal size range are immediately caught in nucleated areas, fewer survive to larger sizes compared to those in
perimeter-defended areas. This is reflected in the fact that the mean carapace
length of lobsters caught in the nucleated areas is shorter (87.8 mm) than that of
those caught in the perimeter-defended areas (89.9 ram).
This difference in size undoubtedly has a profound influence on the numbers of eggs released in the water in these two types of areas and ultimately on
the long-term prospects for the lobster fishery itself. Only 6% of female lobsters
become sexually mature under 90 mm (carapace length), while nearly all females
are mature by 105 mm (Krouse, 1973: 170-171). Thus, all but a very small proportion of female lobsters become sexually mature between 90 and 100 ram.
(There are no figures available indicating when an average female becomes sexually mature.)
The percentage of lobsters in the critical size range (90-100 mm) is higher
in the perimeter-defended areas than in the nucleated ones. There can be no
question that a higher percentage of female lobsters in the perimeter-defended
areas than in the nucleated areas are reaching a size where they can possibly
extrude eggs.
This conclusion is further buttressed by the fact that the probability of a
female reaching maturity in the perimeter-defended areas is 1.52 or nearly 50%
higher than it is in the nucleated areas (Wilson, 1975). In our sample, 2.7% of
z2The difference in the mean carapace length of lobsters caught in the nucleated vs. perimeter-defended areas is very small. However, since females become mature between 90 and
100 mm, these slight differences in size are very significant for the fishery, since they
mean that there is a much higher proportion of mature females in the perimeter-defended
areas.

200

Aeheson

AREAS

NUCLEATED

82

86

90

94
CARAPACE

98

IQ2

106

L E N G T H S OF LOBSTERS

I10

114

118

122

126

MILLIMETERS

Fig. 2. Distribution of catch by length: nucleated and perimeter-defended areas. Perimeter-defended: mean, 89.98; SD, 7.23; N, 5762.
Nucleated areas: mean, 87.89; SD, 5.88;.N, 3327. The curves have been
smoothed by using a 4-mm moving average. A t test (used to test
whether or not there is a significant difference in two means) indicates
that there is a less than 0.005 chance of the two samples being drawn
from the same population. Calculated value of the t equals 12.55.
the lobsters caught in perimeter-defended areas were berried females as opposed
to only 1.2% in the nucleated areas.
The weight of evidence suggests that the fishery can benefit if a larger
number of females are allowed to survive to breeding size. For example, Thomas
(1973: 43-56) argues that the relationship between recruitment (of lobsters into
the fishery) and egg production is positive (as eggs increase, recruits will increase) and will remain so in the foreseeable future. Since the number of eggs is a
function of the number of females, it can be argued that lobstermen in perimeter-defended areas are doing more to maintain the biomass than those in nucleated areas. However, the men in the perimeter-defended areas are not gaining

The Lobster Fiefs

201

all the benefits of their activities. There is no question that lobster larvae float
and travel via currents during one growth stage and then settle down to a sedentary existence. The exact pattern of this movement is not known (Pontecorvo,
1962: 245). Thus, a lobster born by virtue of conservation practices carried out
at Monhegan or Metinic may well end up living its entire adult life in an area
many miles away.
There is, however, a good deal of evidence to suggest that the stock density of lobsters is much better in the perimeter-defended areas than in the nucleated ones. This means that the number of lobsters on any given unit of
bottom in a perimeter-defended area is larger, with all that portends for future
catches and the numbers of lobsters which can reproduce.
Stock density must be measured indirectly, since the use of divers has
proven to be impractical. In the past, attempts have been made to assess the
density of lobster stock by using figures for catch in numbers of pounds, or
pounds caught per trap. Neither is a valid index, since neither takes into account
the number of times a trap is pulled or the working time of the bait. Two areas
producing 1 lb per trap do not have the same stock density if the traps in one are
pulled twice as often as in the other. The best estimates of stock density can be
obtained by figures on catch per unit o f effort. Stock density is measured by
catch in numbers per trap haul times setover days (TH SOD), 13 which can be
figured by using the following equation (Thomas, 1973: 38):
catch
traps hauled • setover days

or

No.
TH SOD

Thus, if a man caught 180 lobsters in a day out of 200 traps which had been
pulled and rebaited 4 days before, the figures for No./(TH SOD) would be
180/(200 • 4) or 0.225.
Using the concept of numbers per trap hauled times setover days, we see
an enormous difference between perimeter-defended and nucleated areas with
regard to stock density (Table II). Three aspects of Table II call for comment.
First, in seasons II and III there is a great difference in the lb/(TH SOD) between
the exclusive territory of perimeter-defended areas and the overlapping areas of nucleated areas (compare lines A and D). Since most of the traps are located in
these two categories, these figures indicate a great degree of difference in the
stock densities.
Second, stock densities are relatively high in those parts of the perimeterdefended areas fished exclusively (and this would include most of such areas). As
one moves toward the boundaries of regions fished with men from other harbor
gangs, the stock densities drop (compare A and B regarding lb/(TH SOD) in
perimeter-defended areas).
13As already mentioned, "setover days" indicates the number of days the trap has been in the
water since it was pulled and rebaited.

202

Acheson

Table lI. Pounds/(Trap Haul X Setover Days) in Nucleated and Perimeter-Defended Areasa
Season I b

Season II c

Season III d

Perimeter-defended A. Exclusive
0.24409 (662) 0.26478 (2245)
areas
B. Overlapping
0.25465 (31)
Nucleated areas

C. Exclusive
0.05353 (326) 0.11133 (313)
D. Overlapping
0.13782 (400)

0.47130 (2681)
0.33414 (98)
0.26735 (610)
0.27949 (1483)

aThe first number in each square is the lb/(TH SOD), where TH SOD = trap haul X setover
days; the number in parentheses represents the sample number of lobsters in each
category. We did not begin to collect data on setover days until mid-April, so our information on season I is slight.
bAugust 1 to December 31.
c January 1 to April 30.
dMay 1 to July 31.
Third, in the nucleated areas, the lb/(TH SOD) values for the small areas
fished exclusively are lower than for those areas fished with men from other
harbors (compare lines C and D). Since the small areas fished exclusively by men
from nucleated harbors are close to the harbor mouths, they are apt to be the
zones fished most heavily. These are areas that part-timers and high school boys
can reach with their small skiffs. The low figures probably reflect this greater
fishing effort.

Economic Benefits
Men in perimeter-defended areas are catching more and bigger lobsters,
and they are catching them with less effort. Both factors translate directly into
economic benefits. The evidence that the men from perimeter-defended areas get
more lobsters can be seen by comparing mean numbers of lobsters caught per
trap in the two types of areas (see Table III).
Table llI. Catch Characteristics by Area and Season
Season II

Season I
Nucleated
Number of lobsters
caught
Number of lobsters
caught per
trap hauled
Mean pounds of
lobster caught
per trap hauled
Pounds per lobster

Season III

PerimeterPerimeterdefended Nucleated defended Nucleated

Perimeterdefended

767

710

2268

2093

2779

0.61986

1.294

0.4788

0.9569

0.7609

1.038

0.72278
1.1648

1.644
1.253

0.5654
1.181

1.209
1.319

0.9113
1.197

1.295
1.238

366

The Lobster Fiefs

203

In every season, the number o f lobsters caught per trap is larger in perimeter-defended areas than in nucleated areas. Thus, if a man from one of these
areas pulls as many traps as a man from a nucleated area, he obviously catches a
larger number o f lobsters to market. It is possible for men from nucleated areas
to earn more than men from the perimeter-defended areas, but to do so they
must pull vastly more traps and greatly increase their effort. There is, o f course,
evidence that some o f the men in perimeter-defended areas are cutting down on
numbers of traps hauled (e.g., informal trap limits). However, there is no evidence to suggest that such trap limits have so greatly cut down the number of
traps any single man uses that incomes are jeopardized. Rather, such limits have
stopped the escalation in numbers o f traps.
The fact that men from perimeter-defended areas catch larger lobsters than
men in nucleated areas is indicated by Fig. 2. This conclusion is buttressed b y
the data on pounds o f lobster caught per trap (see Table III). At all times o f
year, the men from perimeter-defended areas catch more pounds per trap than
men from nucleated areas.
The fact that lobsters are sold by the pound contributes to giving the men
from perimeter-defended areas a higher economic return per trap. Moreover,
larger lobsters which can be sold as "dinner lobsters" in high-priced restaurants
bring a higher price per pound than the smaller lobsters or "culls." Since men
from perimeter-defended areas catch a higher proportion o f dinner lobsters, their
income is boosted still higher. In this regard, one group o f men who fish a
perimeter-defended area have made arrangements wit~a a dealer to receive
$0.06/lb above the going price for all lobsters they catch. The dealer is more
than h a p p y to give it to them because o f the large number o f dinner lobsters
they bring in.
There is an enormous difference between the gross income earned by
lobstermen from nucleated areas and that o f those from perimeter-defended
areas. F r o m October 1972 to March 1973, I interviewed eight lobstermen from
perimeter-defended areas who made an average o f $22,929 from the lobster
industry during the preceding year. 14 The average gross income of fishermen
from nucleated areas was $16,499. is
These differences in income are not merely due to the fact that men from
perimeter-defended areas catch more lobsters than do men in nucleated areas;
price factors play an important role as well. Men on Monhegan, for example, fish

14These are gross income figures, earned from lobster fishing alone. While net income figures
would undoubtedly be more valuable, they are almost impossible to compute accurately
since it is difficult to estimate depreciation on boats and equipment, and no records are
kept on routine maintenance. In order to protect informants, the income figures were not
broken down by variables such as age or harbor gang.
tsWhile the number of fishermen in the sample was very small, the difference in mean income between nucleated and perimeter-defended areas is a surprising $6430.

204

Aeheson

only from January to June, and thus market most of their lobsters in months
when the price is at an annual high. 16

Summary of Biological and Economic
Effects of Territoriality
Perimeter-defended lobster territories are characterized by more restricted
entry than are nucleated ones. This shows up as fewer boats or fishermen per
square mile, and implies lower levels of fishing effort in the perimeter-defended
areas. Fishing effort has also been controlled by various local conservation measures, such as limits on the number of traps allowed or local closed seasons. These
measures do not affect total catch, but do tend to reduce total lobster mortality,
as well as increase the proportion of the more valuable large lobsters caught.
Greater stock density in the perimeter-defended areas suggests that reduced
effort has halted the process of overexploitation. Economic gains from the strategy of maintaining strong defense of traditional boundaries are shown in higher
mean numbers of lobsters per trap, more large and hence higher-priced lobsters,
and higher gross incomes.

MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS OF TERRITORIALITY
The state of Maine does not take advantage of the principle of having perimeter-defended areas, with all of the favorable results they bring. Moreover, the
state has yet to institute any of the conservation measures that men from these
areas have adopted for themselves, such as trap limits and closed seasons. At
present, Maine is considering legislation concerning trap limits and other practices to limit fishing effort. However, the state has no interest in establishing
legalized lobstering territories analogous to the traditional perimeter-defended
areas. There are two reasons for this. The Commission of Sea and Shore Fisheries
argues that the administrative costs involved in establishing and maintaining
small fishing areas would be prohibitive (S. Appolonio, personal communication,
1973). This may be correct. In addition, since the existence of the territorial
systems is hidden from official eyes, the state's officers have little information
on possible beneficial effects.

16In recent years the price has been highest in February and March and during the height of
the summer tourist season. It has been lowest in the fall, when lobsters are plentiful and
demand is relatively low. For example, in October 1973 the price paid to lobstermen was
$1.10 per pound; in January 1974 it was $1.65.

The Lobster Fiefs

205

CONCLUSION
One of the themes that run through the literature on fishing communities
and fisheries economics is the competitive, predatory behavior of individual fishing firms, their inability and unwillingness to conserve the marine resources on
which they depend, and their tendency to overcapitalize. These factors are related to the fact that, by law, oceans are common property resources. Since
oceans are owned by no one and may be exploited by everyone, no one has any
interest in maintaining the resources. Why should one man cut his fishing effort
to conserve? The fish he does not catch today will be caught by someone else
tomorrow. Under these conditions, a fisherman is only being rational when he
expands the amount of capital equipment he owns and tries to catch all the fish
he can as quickly as possible.
The result is what Hardin (1968: 1244) has called the "tragedy of the
commons." Common property resources of all k i n d s - the air, waters, oceans,
publicly-owned l a n d - are subject to abuses and overexploitation that do not
exist with privately owned resources (Hardin, 1968: 1245-1246). It is not only
that common property resources are overexploited by a callous public; they are
also subject to a kind of escalating abuse as people vie with each other to strip
bare resources owned in common. As Hardin (1968: 1244) explains it, those
exploiting a common property resource are locked into a system in which it is
only "logical" that they increase their exploitation without limit. As far as
fisheries are concerned, the "tragedy" takes the form of overexploitation, depletion of fish stocks, underutilization of capital resources, and, where opportunity
costs are low, acceptance of low incomes (Crutchfield, 1964: 212).
At both the national and regional levels, attempts to regulate fisheries
usually take the form of manipulating fishing seasons, fishing areas, and the type
of fishing gear used. While such regulations may limit fish mortality, economists
have pointed out that they are probably ineffective and certainly make fishing
more inefficient (Pontecorvo and Vartdal, 1967; Crutchfield and Pontecorvo,
1969; De Wolf, 1974). Fishing quotas and seasons, for example, leave expensive
boats tied to the dock much of the time and trained crews in the welfare line.
They also increase competition for new equipment and for a "share of the
catch" when fishing is allowed. Several economists have strongly argued that a
much better management system would involve limiting entry into the fishery
either by a licensing system (Pontecorvo, 1967; Christy, 1973) or by taxation
(Pontecorvo and Vartdal, 1967), which would cut production by increasing marginal costs.
The lobstermen of Maine have already evolved a system that produces all
the benefits these economists have envisioned. Given what we know about the
theory of the common property resource, we can only deplore the breakdown of
the traditional perimeter-defended areas. In perimeter-defended areas, access to

206

Acheson

the resource is highly controlled, and escalation of fishing effort has been prevented by the use of political power to enforce local conservation measures.
Moreover, in these areas, fishermen are not caught in a self-defeating "competitive
withdrawal" (Crutchfield and Pontecorvo, 1969), but can cooperate to conserve
the lobster stock and raise their own income levels. In nucleated fishing areas,
the traditional means of controlling escalating fishing effort are breaking down.
The data we have on differences in average size of lobsters, size of catch, size of
stock, and fishing incomes suggest that men fishing in nucleated areas are bearing
the costs of increased participation in an industry that has many characteristics
of a "common property" fishery. 17

REFERENCES
Acheson, J. M. (1972). The territories of the lobstermen. NaturalHistory 81: 60-69.
Acheson, J. M. (1974). Variations in inshore fishing rights in Maine lobstering communities.
In Andersen, R. (ed.), Northern Maritime Europeans, Mouton, The Hague.
Bailey, F. G. (1969). Strategems and Spoils, Schocken, New York.
Christy, F. T. (1973). Fishermen quotas: A tentative suggestion for domestic management.
Occasional Paper 19, Law of the Sea Institute, University of Rhode Island, Kingston.
Christy, F. T., and Scott, A. (1965). The Common-Wealth in Ocean Fisheries, Johns
Hopkins Press, Baltimore.
Crutch field, J. (1964). The marine fisheries: A problem in international cooperation. American Economic Review Proceedings 54:207-218.
Crutchfield, J. (1973). Resources from the sea. In English, T. S. (ed.), Ocean Resources and
Public Policy, University of Washington Press, Seattle, pp. 105-133.
Crutchfield, J., and Pontecorvo, G. (1969). The Pacific Salmon Fisheries, Johns Hopkins
Press, Baltimore,
De Wolf, G. (1974). The Lobster Fishery o f the Maritime Provinces: Economic Effects o f
Regulations, Bulletin 187, Fisheries Research Board o f Canada, Ottawa.

17In two respects, the theory of the common property resource does not quite fit the situation in the Maine lobster industry, First, the economists writing on the common property
resource model are assuming that common property is completely accessible to everyone
while private property has only one owner (e.g., Scott, 1955:120, 121). In fact, no lobsterhag area is accessible to the general public. As we have pointed out, it is vastly more difficult
to gain entry into harbor gangs fishing perimeter-defended areas than those fishing nucleated areas. But one must have certain characteristics to become a member of a harbor gang
fishing even in a nucleated area. Moreover, there is no area along the coast owned by a
single individual. All areas are "owned" by groups. Second, entrepreneurs exploiting
"privately owned resources" cut down on the volume of production because of increased marginal costs, whereas those exploiting "common property resources" have no
such constraint. In the case of the Maine lobster industry, there is no question that men
fishing perimeter-defended areas try harder to cut down fishing effort than men fishing
nucleated areas. In part, this reduction in effort is due to self-enforced "trap limits" and
closed seasons. Even more important is the fact that they use political pressure to keep the
number of fishermen in their areas smaB. This naturally decreases the number of traps
being fished there. In short, decreased fishing effort is not so much due to the sacrifices
of the individual men fishing in "perimeter-defended areas" as it is due to the fact that
they keep other men out, and enforce the sacrifices on them. The effect is the same. Men
fishing perimeter-defended areas restrict fishing effort, which has clear beneficial effects.

The Lobster Fiefs

207

Dow, R. L. (1969). Cyclic and geographic trends in seawater temperature and abundance of
American lobster. Science 164: 1060-1063.
Gordon, H. S. (1954). The economic theory of a common property resource. Journal of
Political Economy 62: 124-142.
Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science 162: 1243-1248.
Hockett, C. F. (1973). Man's Place in Nature, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Krouse, J. S. (1973). Maturity, sex ratio, and size competition of the natural population of
American lobster, Homarus americanus, along the Maine coast. Fishery Bulletin 71:
165-173.
Maine Sea and Shore Fisheries (1973). Maine Lobster Landings 1939 to Present, Statistical
Bulletin No. 1, Department of Sea and Shore Fisheries, Augusta.
Pontecorvo, G. (1962). Regulation of the North American lobster fishery. In Hamlisch, R.
(ed.), Economic Effects o f Fishery Regulation, F.A.O. Fisheries Reports No. 5,
Rome, pp. 240-267.
Pontecorvo, G. (1967). Optimization and taxation in an open-access resource: The fishery.
In Gaffney, M. (ed.), Extractive Resources and Taxation, University of Wisconsin
Press, Madison, pp. 157-167.
Pontecorvo, G., and Vartdal, K., Jr. (1967). Optimizing resource use: The Norwegian winter
herring fishery. Stats~konomislr Tidsskrift 2: 65-87.
Scott, A. (1955). The objectives of sole ownership. Journal o f Political Economy 63: 118124.
Thomas, J. (1973). An Analysis o f the Commercial Lobster (Homarus americanus) Fishery
Along the Coast o f Maine, August 1966 Through December 1970, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration Technical Report, National Marine Fisheries Service, Washington, D.C.
Wilson, J. A. (1975). The tragedy of the commons: A test. In Baten and Hardin, G. (eds.),
Managing the Commons, Freeman, San Francisco.

View publication stats

